                                                 Measuring AI Ability to Complete Long Software
                                                                      Tasks


                                                       Thomas Kwa∗†, Ben West∗, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia,
                                                      Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar, Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney Von Arx

                                                   Ryan Bloom, Thomas Broadley, Haoxing Du, Brian Goodrich, Nikola Jurkovic,
                                                 Luke Harold Miles‡, Seraphina Nix, Tao Lin, Chris Painter, Neev Parikh, David Rein,
                                                              Lucas Jun Koba Sato, Hjalmar Wijk, Daniel M. Ziegler§

                                                                            Elizabeth Barnes, Lawrence Chan
                                                                   Model Evaluation & Threat Research (METR)




arXiv:2503.14499v4 [cs.AI] 10 Jul 2026
                                                                                         Abstract
                                                     Despite rapid progress on AI benchmarks, the real-world meaning of benchmark
                                                     performance remains unclear. To quantify the capabilities of AI systems in terms
                                                     of human capabilities, we propose a new metric: 50%-task-completion time hori-
                                                     zon, the time humans typically take to complete tasks that AI models can complete
                                                     with 50% success rate. We first timed humans with relevant domain expertise on
                                                     a combination of RE-Bench, HCAST, and 66 novel shorter tasks. On these tasks,
                                                     current frontier AI models such as o3 have a 50% time horizon of around 110
                                                     minutes. Furthermore, frontier AI time horizon has doubled approximately ev-
                                                     ery seven months since 2019, though the trend may have accelerated since 2024.
                                                     The increase in AI models’ time horizons seems to be primarily driven by greater
                                                     reliability, ability to adapt to mistakes, logical reasoning, and capacity for tool
                                                     use. We discuss the limitations of our results—including their degree of external
                                                     validity—and the implications of increased autonomy for dangerous capabilities.
                                                     If these results generalize to real-world software tasks, extrapolation of this trend
                                                     predicts that within 5 years, AI systems will be capable of automating many soft-
                                                     ware tasks that currently take humans a month.


                                         1       Introduction
                                         In the last five years, frontier AI systems have undergone a dramatic transformation in capabili-
                                         ties, evolving from basic text generation [1] to autonomously executing complex multi-hour ma-
                                         chine learning research projects [2]. Sufficiently capable AIs could perform dangerous, highly com-
                                         plex actions like autonomous development of chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear weapons
                                         (CBRN) and self-replication and adaptation outside human control [3]. Understanding AI capabili-
                                         ties helps inform the development of safety guardrails as systems become increasingly powerful. In
                                         particular, many frontier AI developers have committed to using measures of specific AI capabili-
                                         ties to determine the necessary risk mitigations for their frontier AI systems. Robust benchmarks
                                         that can accurately track and forecast AI capabilities thus form the foundation for responsible AI
                                         governance and risk mitigation.
                                             ∗
                                               Equal contribution.
                                             †
                                               Corresponding author, thomas.kwa@metr.org.
                                             ‡
                                               Ohm Chip. Work done at METR.
                                             §
                                               Anthropic. Work done at METR.


                                         Preprint. Under review.
Figure 1: The length of tasks (measured by how long they take human professionals) that generalist
autonomous frontier model agents can complete with 50% reliability has been doubling approx-
imately every 7 months for the last 6 years (Section 3). The shaded region represents 95% CI
calculated by hierarchical bootstrap over task families, tasks, and task attempts. Even if the absolute
measurements are off by a factor of 10, the trend predicts that in under a decade we will see AI
agents that can independently complete a large fraction of software tasks that currently take humans
days or weeks (Section 5).


However, existing benchmarks face several key limitations. First, they often consist of artificial
rather than economically valuable tasks. Second, benchmarks are often adversarially selected for
tasks that current models struggle with compared to humans,1 biasing the comparison to human
performance. Most critically, individual benchmarks saturate increasingly quickly [6], and we lack
a more general, intuitive, and quantitative way to compare between different benchmarks,2 which
prevents meaningful comparison between models of vastly different capabilities (e.g., GPT-2 versus
Claude 3.7 ). As a consequence, while the last few years have seen dramatic increases in AI perfor-
mance on many individual benchmarks, understanding the progress of AI capabilities in general has
required estimating the qualitative difficulty of the latest benchmarks AI systems can pass.
We propose tracking AI progress over time using the task completion time horizon: the duration
of tasks that models can complete at a certain success probability, providing an intuitive measure of
real-world capability compared to humans. As models may not reliably complete all tasks of a given
length, we operationalize this by measuring the X%-(task completion) time horizon–the length of
tasks that models can complete approximately X% of the time.
We prototype this methodology using three datasets designed to capture skills required for research
or software engineering (Section 2.1), totaling 170 tasks with a wide range of difficulty: HCAST
[8], RE-Bench [2], and Software Atomic Actions (SWAA), a new suite of shorter software tasks
that can measure pre-2023 models (Appendix B.1.3). Using skilled human baseliners, we estimate
the duration that a domain knowledgeable human (without task-specific context) takes to complete
these tasks (Section 2.2). We evaluate the performance of 12 frontier models from 2019 to 2025 on
these tasks (Section 2.3). Using methodology inspired by human psychometric studies, we then es-
timate the duration of tasks that models can complete with 50% success rate—the 50% time horizon
(Section 3.1).
We find that the 50% time horizon has been growing exponentially from 2019–2025 on these tasks,
with a doubling time of approximately seven months (Figure 1). We compare our main result with
our exploratory results on non-SWAA tasks, finding that the 2023–2025 horizon growth rate is about
20% faster than the 2019–2025 rate (Section F.1). We also measure the 80% time horizon of models

   1
     For example, HellaSwag [4] and Humanity’s Last Exam [5] were both generated by adversarially filtering
problems against the best performing language models available at the time.
   2
     SWE-bench Verified [7] does come with human-estimated task completion times. We use SWE-bench
Verified tasks and accompanying time estimates to validate our main result in Section 4.1.


                                                    2
Figure 2: Our methodology for measuring AI agent time horizon. First, we create a diverse task
suite of 170 tasks. Second, we have both humans and AI agents (consisting of an AI model and a
scaffold) attempt these tasks, recording the time taken by successful humans and the success rate for
AI agents. Third, we fit a logistic model to find the time horizon at which each AI agent has a 50%
chance of success, and plot this against the release date of the model.


(Figure 17) and find a similar trend, though horizons are roughly 5x shorter. This progress appears
to be driven by several key factors: improved logical reasoning, better tool use, and greater reliabil-
ity and self-awareness in task execution (Section 3.3). We also note several limitations of current
systems—notably, performance is much lower on less structured, “messier” tasks (Section F.2).
Since our tasks do not perfectly represent the average segment of intellectual labor by researchers
and software engineers, this raises the question of external validity (Section 4): whether the exponen-
tial trend holds on real-world tasks. We include three supplementary external validity experiments,
which find little evidence of performance trends being slower on the somewhat more realistic tasks
we tested, but do not rule out the possibility that trends are meaningfully slower on the distribution
of tasks required to automate software engineer jobs. We also find evidence that AI agent time
horizons can differ by a large factor depending on the task domain and reference human population.
We conclude by discussing implications for AI capabilities forecasting (Section 5). Naively ex-
trapolating the trend in horizon length implies that AI will reach a time horizon of >1 month (167
work hours) between mid-2028 and mid-2031 (Figure 6). However, extrapolation is affected by both
external validity concerns and future changes in the trend.


1.1   Related Work

Here, we briefly discuss related work. See Appendix A for an expanded discussion.

Agentic AI capability benchmarks Many recent benchmarks aim to measure the capability of
AI systems to act as agents in general, including AgentBench [9], ToolBench [10], GAIA [11],
TheAgentCompany [12], the Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard [13]. In this work, we study
AI agent performance on RE-Bench[2], HCAST [8], and SWE-Bench Verified [7], which focus
on machine learning and software engineering tasks. Other similar benchmarks include MLAgent-
Bench [14], MLEBench [15], and DSBench [16]. In concurrent work, Miserendino et al. [17] create
the SWE-Lancer benchmark, consisting of 1400 freelance software engineering tasks gathered from
Upwork with real-world payouts totalling above $1 million.

AI capability forecasting This work builds on previous efforts to forecast the capabilities of AI
systems over time, including efforts to contextualize benchmark performance using human experts
Phuong et al. [3]; Murray et al. [18] and efforts to forecast performance on particular benchmarks
Owen [19]; Pimpale et al. [20]. Contextualizing AI capabilities using human time horizon was
proposed by Ngo [21], and similar concepts were discussed in Carlsmith [22] and Cotra [23].


                                                  3
    Family                   Length             Description
    find shell script        3 seconds          Multiple choice: “Which file is a shell script?” Choices:
                                                “run.sh”, “run.txt”, “run.py”, “run.md”
    wikipedia research       1 minute           Research simple factual information from Wikipedia and pro-
                                                vide accurate answers to straightforward questions.
    oxdna simple             9 minutes          Detect and fix a bug in the input files for a molecular dynam-
                                                ics simulation using the oxDNA package.
    munge data               56 minutes         Write a Python script to transform JSON data from one for-
                                                mat to another by inferring the conversion rules from pro-
                                                vided example files.
    cuda backtesting         8 hours            Speed up a Python backtesting tool for trade executions by
                                                implementing custom CUDA kernels while preserving all
                                                functionality, aiming for a 30x performance improvement.
Table 1: Example tasks for different durations; see Rein et al. [8] and Wijk et al. [2] for more
examples.



Human psychometric methods Our methodology draws inspiration from human psychometric
testing, especially Item Response Theory [24; 25; 26].


2         Measuring AI agent performance on realistic tasks

2.1       Task suite / dataset

Our tasks comprise three distinct task suites:

           1. A subset of HCAST [8]: 97 diverse software tasks ranging from 1 minute to 30 hours.3
           2. RE-Bench [2]: 7 difficult ML research engineering tasks, all eight hours long.
           3. Software atomic actions (SWAA): 66 single-step tasks representing short segments of work
              by software developers, ranging from 1 second to 30 seconds.

All tasks are automatically scored with a continuous score or binary threshold; details of how we
normalize and process scores are given in Section 3.1, and other task suite details in Appendix B.

Example tasks See Table 1 for five example tasks. Tasks under 1 minute measure knowledge rel-
evant to professional software engineering. At 10 minutes, tasks can include the easiest meaningful
step of a real software project (e.g. configuring a common open-source package). The shortest tasks
that could be standalone economically relevant projects take around one hour; by eight hours tasks
represent valuable software projects. Many more examples of these tasks are available in Wijk et al.
[2] and Rein et al. [8].

2.2       Baselining

In order to ground AI agent performance, we also measure the performance of multiple human
“baseliners” on most tasks and recorded the duration of their attempts. In total, we use over 800
baselines totaling 2,529 hours, of which 558 baselines (286 successful) come from HCAST and RE-
Bench, and 249 (236 successful) from the shorter SWAA tasks. 148 of the 169 tasks have human
baselines, but we rely on researcher estimates for 21 tasks in HCAST.
Our baseliners are skilled professionals in software engineering, machine learning, and cybersecu-
rity, with the majority having attended world top-100 universities. They have an average of about 5
years of relevant experience, with software engineering baseliners having more experience than ML
or cybersecurity baseliners. For more details about baselines, see Appendix C.1.

      3
    Our results also include one task from GAIA [11], and five tasks involving writing code that is robust to an
adversary.


                                                       4
Figure 3: Left: Average task success rate across the entire combined suite, for each model. As
with all of the results reported in the main body of this work, to reduce the influence of large task
families, we weight each task by the inverse square root of the number of tasks in the family it
belongs to. Right: Model success rates are negatively correlated with how much time it takes a
human to complete the task. (y = −0.07x + 0.66, R2 : 0.83)


2.3       Results

We measure 12 frontier (and 4 near-frontier) models released between 2019 and 2025; full infor-
mation on the models and scaffolds used can be found in Appendix C.3. We perform 8 runs4 per
agent/task pair and report the average results in Figure 3. There is a strong upwards trend over
time, with recent models completing approximately 50% of all tasks, while earlier models perform
substantially worse. We find substantial correlation between the tasks that models can complete
(Figure 22), with average correlation of approximately 0.73.
There is a negative correlation between the time it takes a human baseliner to complete a task and
the average success rate (across all models) on the task. This decrease in success rate over length
(Figure 3) is well-fit by an exponential model (R2 ≈ 0.80 when regressing model success rate
against the logarithm of human time-to-complete). As expected, more recent models can complete
longer tasks, with Claude 3.7 Sonnet and o3 completing some tasks that take human baseliners >4
hours (Figure 4).


3         Time horizon

3.1       Computing time horizon

To convert agent run data to task completion time horizon, we first convert the agent performance on
each task to a binary value (success or failure). Many tasks are naturally binary, including all SWAA
tasks. Continuously scored tasks are binarized via a task-specific threshold chosen to represent
human performance. For HCAST, the task-specific threshold is the same “target score” the human
baseliner tries to achieve, which we also use to filter for successful runs. RE-Bench tasks have a
fixed time rating of 8 hours, so the task-specific threshold is the average score of 7-9–hour human
runs.
Once we have agent success rates and time ratings for each task, we fit time horizons by performing
the following logistic regression:5


                       psuccess (agent, task) = σ((log hagent − log ttask ) · βagent )

      4
     This number is approximate, because a small number of runs failed due to internal infrastructure issues.
      5
     Compare to Item Response Theory (IRT) [24]. Like in IRT, we use logistic regression to find the task
difficulty at which the agent has a 50% chance of success, but unlike IRT, we use difficulty ratings directly based
on human baseline time rather than ratings learned from agent performance. Further details and comparison to
standard IRT methods are provided in Appendix C.4.


                                                        5
Figure 4: Success rates of all models on the test suite, showing the computation of time horizon as
predicted 50% success rate time. The logistic fit is fairly good, though there is a jump in success
rate between <1 minute SWAA tasks and >1 minute HCAST tasks.


where ttask is the geometric mean time of successful human baselines, and hagent and βagent are
learned parameters, with hagent representing the 50% time horizon.

3.2   Time horizon vs. release date

In Figure 1, we plot the time horizons of each model against their release date—the date at which the
lab first publicly announced the frontier model.6 In addition, we linearly regress7 log(time horizon)
against release date, finding that time horizon has doubled every 207 days with a 95% bootstrapped
confidence interval 166-240 days (roughly ±19%). Error bars are calculated via 10,000 samples
from a three-level hierarchical bootstrap over task families, then tasks, then runs.
While there are wide error bars on each individual models’ horizon lengths, these errors are highly
correlated between models. This is because tasks at the same human time rating vary widely in
difficulty for models, and sampling easy (or hard) tasks will result in a higher (or lower) horizon
estimate for all models. Therefore, we are more confident in the slope of the time horizon trend than
in the time horizon of any particular model. The fit is not sensitive to various hyperparameters such
as regularization, weighting of tasks, and WLS vs. OLS (see Figure 6).
Horizon length increases substantially over the entire time period from 2019 to early 2025. GPT-2
has a 50% time horizon of only 2 seconds, while o3 has a 110-minute time horizon and succeeds
at several tasks over 4 hours. Also, o3 lies above the long-run trend (p = 0.006); this is robust to
methodological ablations like using continuous scoring (Appendix H), which may imply the trend
in 2024 and early 2025 is faster.
    6
      In most cases, the release date is for each frontier AI model is the same model as the one we evalu-
ated. However, GPT-3 (davinci) and GPT-3.5 (code-davinci-002 and text-davinci-002) are closed-source and
no longer available through API access, but we use their release dates for the closest available models, which
OpenAI advertises as having equivalent performance: GPT-3’s release date for davinci-002, and GPT-3.5’s date
for gpt3.5-turbo-instruct.
    7
      Specifically, we perform Ordinary Least Squares regression on log(model horizon) = α + β · release date.
In Appendix H we discuss other curve-fitting methods, and conclude that the fit is not sensitive to various
hyperparameters such as regularization, weighting of tasks, or WLS vs. OLS.


                                                      6
Table 2: Categorization of 31 failed          Failure type                      GPT-4 1106   o1
runs by GPT-4 1106 and 32 failed runs         Poor planning/tool choice             4         6
by o1 (Section 3.3). Note that as o1 suc-     Incorrect mental math/reasoning       6        7
ceeds at more tasks, its failures corre-      Premature task abandonment            8        16
spond to more challenging tasks com-          Repeating failed actions             12         2
pared to GPT-4’s failures.                    Other                                 1         1
                                              Total                                31        32




3.2.1    Time horizons at 50% success rate vs 80% success rate

To check whether our choice of 50% success rate affects the long-run trend, we also compute the
time horizon at which AI agents succeed at tasks with 80% success rate, shown in Figure 17. The
doubling time in 80% time horizon (204 days) is similar to the doubling time of 50% time horizon
(207 days), within margin of error. However, models’ 80% time horizons are 4-6x shorter, suggest-
ing that even models that sometimes succeed on difficult and diverse tasks cannot reliably perform
tasks of moderate length. Due to the limited dataset, we cannot confidently measure time horizons
at very high success rates (e.g. 95%)– see Section E.3.


3.3     Qualitative analysis

By examining transcripts from 31 randomly sampled unsuccessful GPT-4 1106 agent runs and 32
o1 runs, we observe that models seem to have improved greatly in terms of tool use capabilities,
demonstrate a markedly greater ability to adapt to mistakes (as opposed to repeating unsuccessful
actions), and perform much better at parts of tasks requiring logical reasoning or code generation.
However, we noticed that AI agents still seem to struggle in intuitively “messier” environments—
specifically, environments without clear feedback loops, or where the agent needs to proactively
seek out relevant information.
Table 3.3 shows the categorized failures by model. We provide definitions of these categories, as
well as examples of qualitative improvements and continuing limitations in Appendix D.


4     External validity and robustness

We check whether the 2023–2025 trend without the SWAA dataset retrodicts the trend since 2019,
and find that the trends agree. We also perform three experiments to check external validity.
First, we replicate our methods on SWE-bench Verified. We find that the exponential trend still holds
(Figure 4.1), albeit with an even shorter doubling time, possibly because SWE-bench Verified diffi-
culty annotations, meant to represent high-context maintainer time, may differentially underestimate
how long human contractors take to perform easier SWE-bench tasks.
Second, we score the HCAST and RE-Bench tasks against a list of 16 “messiness” factors that
aim to capture some systematic differences between the tasks studied here and hard“real-world”
tasks. Some examples include whether the task is resource limited, novel, or involves a dynamic
environment (Section H.6). Controlling for task length, we find models perform worse on tasks that
have higher messiness scores. Notably, trends in AI agent performance over time are similar for the
lower and higher messiness subsets of these tasks (see Figure 12). In particular, we find no evidence
of plateaus in performance trends specific to the higher messiness subset.
Third, we measure AI agent performance on a small, uncontaminated set of our internal pull re-
quests (PRs) (Section C.2). We find large differences in the speed at which different human groups
complete the internal PR tasks, with contractors taking 5-18x longer to fix issues than repo main-
tainers. We also find that AI agent performance is worse than would be predicted by maintainer
time-to-complete as a measure of task length, but is consistent with contractor time-to-complete,
SWE-bench Verified information is provided below. Details of the retrodiction and messiness anal-
ysis can be found in Appendix F, and details of the internal PRs experiment in C.2.


                                                 7
Figure 5:

Performance of frontier AI models
using reported SWE-bench Verified
results (Section 4.1). We observe a
similar exponential trend to Figure 1,
albeit with a steeper slope.




4.1       SWE-bench Verified

To check whether we observe similar performance trends on other benchmarks, we apply our
methodology to SWE-bench Verified, an industry standard benchmark for evaluating language
model performance on software engineering tasks [27]. All tasks in the SWE-bench Verified dataset
were harvested from large open source repositories, like matplotlib or django, and then filtered to
ensure they are automatically checkable and well-specified [28].
Model time horizon computed from SWE-bench Verified tasks seem to follow an exponential trend
from late 2023 through 2024. However, while the doubling time predicted by HCAST + SWAA
+ RE-bench using 2024 models is 143 days, the doubling time on SWE-bench Verified results is
shorter—around 70 days.
SWE-bench Verified time annotations were based on the expected time it would take an “engineer
who has had a few hours to familiarize themselves with the codebase” to solve the issue [28]. We
found that annotator time estimates differentially underestimate how long our contract baseliners
take to complete the easiest SWE-bench verified tasks. As a result, our time horizon estimates for
SWE-bench Verified (which use annotator times) are likely to underestimate the time horizon of less
capable models relative to contractor times, in turn shortening doubling times. For more details see
Appendix H.5.

5         Extrapolation
Extrapolating towards one-month-horizon AI To forecast when AI systems may be capable
of autonomously producing large economic value and potential catastrophic actions, we chose one
month (approximately 167 working hours for a fair comparison with humans, since humans can-
not work 24/7) for two reasons. First, Ngo [21] writes that a 1-month AGI (defined as an AI that
outperforms most knowledgeable humans who are given 1 month of work hours, i.e. 167 hours, to
perform the task) would necessarily exceed human performance at economically valuable endeavors
like writing large software applications, founding startups, and making novel scientific discoveries.8
Second, one month is around the period when new hires at a company begin to complete onboarding
and generate economic value,9 and so an AI with a horizon of 1 month could be capable of ac-
quiring context like a human employee, allowing it to complete high-context as well as low-context
tasks. We cannot rule out that a system capable of 1-month tasks, even at 50% reliability, could be
transformative for our society, potentially including the ability for catastrophic harm.

Sensitivity analysis Figure 6 shows a sensitivity analysis of our results over various sources of
noise. “Bootstrap (tasks)”, “Bootstrap (runs)” and “Bootstrap (models)” represents the limited num-
ber of tasks, run-to-run variance, and limited models respectively. “Weighting/regularization” repre-
      8
     Note that our forecasts concern AI with a 1-month horizon on software tasks, not 1-month AGI, because
we evaluate models only on software and research tasks. Nevertheless, given past correlations in different areas
of AI performance, 1-month (167 hours) time horizon AI may be significantly generally capable.
   9
     Onboarding “can last from a few weeks to more than a year” [29], and employees often start generating
economic value midway through the onboarding process.


                                                       8
Figure 6: A sensitivity analysis of the extrapolated date at which frontier AI systems will have a
horizon of 1 month. In each row, we apply 10,000 random perturbations to our data and find the
distribution over the date of 1-month AI implied by the perturbed data. Box endpoints represent the
25th and 75th percentiles, and whiskers the 10th and 90th percentiles, with outliers not displayed.
Note that this plot does not account for future changes in the trend or external validity concerns,
which are responsible for the majority of our uncertainty.



sents methodological choices; this perturbation includes 10 hyperparameter combinations with and
without task diversity weighting, and with a logistic regression regularization parameter between
0.01 and 0.2. “IID Baseline Noise” multiplies every task duration by a random factor based on the
empirical distribution of baseline times. Note our confidence in the 2024–2025 only trend is low
because there are only seven frontier models in this time span.
Because our analysis puts low probability on the growth rate of time horizon on our tasks being
much slower than one doubling every 8 months, the uncertainty in the extrapolated date of 1-month
AI is fairly small (80% CI width about 2 years, central estimate mid-2029). If future progress instead
follows the 2024–2025 trend, 1-month AI would arrive sooner, with half the probability in 2027 and
even late 2026.
It is possible that systematic biases and alternate methodologies have a greater impact on forecasts,
and we discuss these in Appendix H. In addition, due to the inherent difficulty of predicting the
future, real forecasts will have larger error than this naive extrapolation, which we discuss below.



Task distribution limitations We note several differences between this task suite and realistic
tasks in Appendix B.2: in short, realistic tasks rarely have automatic scoring, and often require
dealing with other agents, resource constraints, dynamic environments, and high reliability require-
ments. Such differences cast doubt on whether the rapid performance improvements seen on this
task suite (and other benchmarks) will generalize. It may be that benchmarks like HCAST and SWE-
Bench Verified are insufficient for forecasting real-world AI capabilities, and accurate forecasting
will require deliberate construction of more realistic benchmarks without these limitations.



Future changes in time horizon trends The time horizon trend may significantly change in the
future due to factors including agency training, compute scaling, and automation of AI research and
development. Agency training and eventual automation of AI R&D are more likely to speed up the
trend, whereas compute scaling could slow it (but be partially offset by algorithmic improvements);
a future artificial general intelligence (AGI) could technically have an infinite time horizon. See
Appendix E for details.


                                                  9
6   Discussion
Summary In this paper, we proposed an intuitive, quantitative metric for AI capabilities: the
task completion time horizon, which relates AI performance on tasks to the typical length of time
human experts require to complete the tasks. We constructed a dataset of 66 shorter SWAA tasks,
combined these with existing benchmarks, and conducted baselines to estimate their difficulty. To
measure the trend in time horizon, we benchmarked 11 frontier AI models released between 2019
and 2025 on this dataset, and found (Section 3) that the 50% task completion time horizon on these
tasks has been growing exponentially from 2019–2025 with a doubling time of approximately seven
months (Figure 1). We also noted important limitations of current systems, particularly their lower
performance on less structured, “messier” tasks (Appendix F.2).
Finally, we attempt to extrapolate the trend on these tasks to one-month (167 hours) AI (Section 5),
finding that if the trend continues and observed performance trends generalize to real-world tasks,
an 80% confidence interval for the release date of AI that can complete 1-month long software tasks
spans from mid-2028 to mid-2030 (Section 5)– or even as soon as early 2027 if the 2024–2025 trend
continues.

Limitations and future work Even though we believe the exponential trend to be robust, we
caution that time horizon is always measured relative to a domain, task distribution, and human
baseliners’ level of skill and context, and can be difficult to measure in practice, especially for
longer horizons or success rates near 100%. We discuss nuances with interpreting time horizon in
Appendix E.3. Finally, in Appendix E.4, we discuss ways of extending or improving our results,
such as by studying multiple domains, more models, better elicitation, inference scaling, or other
statistical methods.

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
The authors thank the following reviewers for feedback on draft versions of this paper. Ryan Green-
blatt, Aaron Scher, Romeo Dean, Mike Knoop, Jeff Wu, Steve Newman, Rohit Krishnan, Taren
Stinebrickner-Kauffman, JS Denain, Jacob Pfau, Seb Krier, Anton Troynikov, Max Henderson,
Ajeya Cotra, Max Nadeau, Tamay Besiroglu, Nate Thomas. The authors thank Charles Foster and
Michael Chen for their support with the publication.
We especially thank the following reviewers for substantial feedback: Sara Fish, David Duvenaud,
Eli Lifland, Holden Karnofsky, and Rif A. Saurous. We also thank Stephanie He for her graphic
design work on Figure 2, and Ryan Greenblatt for input on the scoring methodology.




                                                10
References
 [1] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
     Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

 [2] Hjalmar Wijk, Tao Lin, Joel Becker, Sami Jawhar, Neev Parikh, Thomas Broadley, Lawrence
     Chan, Michael Chen, Josh Clymer, Jai Dhyani, et al. RE-Bench: Evaluating frontier
     AI R&D capabilities of language model agents against human experts. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2411.15114, 2024.

 [3] Mary Phuong, Matthew Aitchison, Elliot Catt, Sarah Cogan, Alexandre Kaskasoli, Victoria
     Krakovna, David Lindner, Matthew Rahtz, Yannis Assael, Sarah Hodkinson, et al. Evaluating
     frontier models for dangerous capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13793, 2024.

 [4] Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. HellaSwag: Can
     a machine really finish your sentence? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
     Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4791–4800, 2019.

 [5] Long Phan, Alice Gatti, Ziwen Han, Nathaniel Li, Josephina Hu, Hugh Zhang, Sean Shi,
     Michael Choi, Anish Agrawal, Arnav Chopra, et al. Humanity’s last exam. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2501.14249, 2025.

 [6] Nestor Maslej, Loredana Fattorini, Raymond Perrault, Vanessa Parli, Anka Reuel, Erik Bryn-
     jolfsson, John Etchemendy, Katrina Ligett, Terah Lyons, James Manyika, Juan Carlos Niebles,
     Yoav Shoham, Russell Wald, and Jack Clark. Artificial intelligence index report 2024, 2024.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19522.

 [7] Neil Chowdhury, James Aung, Chan Jun Shern, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, Giulio Starace,
     Evan Mays, Rachel Dias, Marwan Aljubeh, Mia Glaese, Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Ley-
     ton Ho, Tejal Patwardhan, Kevin Liu, and Aleksander Madry. Introducing SWE-bench ver-
     ified. https://openai.com/index/introducing-swe-bench-verified/, 2024. Ac-
     cessed: 2025-02-26.

 [8] David Rein, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Seraphina Nix, Chris Canal, Daniel O’Connell, Pip
     Arnott, Ryan Bloom, Thomas Broadley, Katharyn Garcia, Brian Goodrich, Max Hasin, Sami
     Jawhar, Megan Kinniment, Thomas Kwa, Aron Lajko, Nate Rush, Lucas Jun Koba Sato, Syd-
     ney Von Arx, Ben West, Lawrence Chan, and Elizabeth Barnes. HCAST: Human-Calibrated
     Autonomy Software Tasks. Forthcoming, 2025.

 [9] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang
     Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du,
     Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong,
     and Jie Tang. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688, 2023.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03688.

[10] Zhicheng Guo, Sijie Cheng, Hao Wang, Shihao Liang, Yujia Qin, Peng Li, Zhiyuan Liu,
     Maosong Sun, and Yang Liu. StableToolBench: Towards stable large-scale benchmarking
     on tool learning of large language models, 2024.

[11] Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom.
     GAIA: a benchmark for general AI assistants. In The Twelfth International Confer-
     ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     fibxvahvs3.

[12] Frank F Xu, Yufan Song, Boxuan Li, Yuxuan Tang, Kritanjali Jain, Mengxue Bao, Zora Z
     Wang, Xuhui Zhou, Zhitong Guo, Murong Cao, et al. Theagentcompany: benchmarking llm
     agents on consequential real world tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14161, 2024.

[13] Fanjia Yan, Huanzhi Mao, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Tianjun Zhang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica,
     and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Berkeley function calling leaderboard. https://gorilla.cs.
     berkeley.edu/blogs/8_berkeley_function_calling_leaderboard.html, 2024.


                                              11
[14] Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. MLAgentBench: evaluating lan-
     guage agents on machine learning experimentation. In Proceedings of the 41st International
     Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024.
[15] Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays,
     Giulio Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, Lilian Weng, and Aleksander
     Madry. MLE-bench: Evaluating machine learning agents on machine learning engineering,
     2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.07095.
[16] Liqiang Jing, Zhehui Huang, Xiaoyang Wang, Wenlin Yao, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Hongming
     Zhang, Xinya Du, and Dong Yu. DSBench: How far are data science agents to becoming data
     science experts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07703, 2024.
[17] Samuel Miserendino, Michele Wang, Tejal Patwardhan, and Johannes Heidecke. Swe-lancer:
     Can frontier llms earn $1 million from real-world freelance software engineering?, 2025. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12115.
[18] Malcolm Murray, Henry Papadatos, Otter Quarks, Pierre-François Gimenez, and Simeon Cam-
     pos. Mapping ai benchmark data to quantitative risk estimates through expert elicitation. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2503.04299, 2025.
[19] David Owen. How predictable is language model benchmark performance?, 2024.
[20] Govind Pimpale, Axel Højmark, Jérémy Scheurer, and Marius Hobbhahn. Forecasting frontier
     language model agent capabilities, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15850.
[21] Richard Ngo. Clarifying and predicting AGI. https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
     BoA3agdkAzL6HQtQP/clarifying-and-predicting-agi, 2023. Accessed: 2024-03-21.
[22] Joseph Carlsmith.    How much computational power does it take to match the hu-
     man brain?, 2020.            URL https://www.openphilanthropy.org/research/
     how-much-computational-power-does-it-take-to-match-the-human-brain/.
     Open Philanthropy report, August 14, 2020.
[23] Ajeya Cotra. Draft report on ai timelines, 2020. URL https://www.alignmentforum.
     org/posts/KrJfoZzpSDpnrv9va/draft-report-on-ai-timelines. Draft report on AI
     timelines; technical report.
[24] Frank B Baker. The basics of item response theory. ERIC, 2001.
[25] R. J. de Ayala. Handbook of Item Response Theory: Models, Applications, and Issues. Guilford
     Press, 2017.
[26] Fernando Martı́nez-Plumed, Ricardo B.C. Prudêncio, Adolfo Martı́nez-Usó, and José
     Hernández-Orallo. Item response theory in ai: Analysing machine learning classifiers at the in-
     stance level. Artificial Intelligence, 271:18–42, 2019. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: https://doi.org/10.
     1016/j.artint.2018.09.004. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
     pii/S0004370219300220.
[27] OpenAI. Openai o3-mini. https://openai.com/index/openai-o3-mini, 2025. [Ac-
     cessed 18-03-2025].
[28] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
     Karthik R Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?
     In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
     //openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
[29] Dave Zielinski. How to optimize onboarding, June 2019. URL https://www.shrm.
     org/topics-tools/news/hr-magazine/how-to-optimize-onboarding. Accessed on
     March 17, 2025.
[30] Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bow-
     man. GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language under-
     standing. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018. URL
     https://gluebenchmark.com/.


                                                 12
[31] Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Naman Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, and
     Samuel R. Bowman. SuperGLUE: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language un-
     derstanding systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Work-
     shop, 2019. URL https://super.gluebenchmark.com/.
[32] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Ja-
     cob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. CoRR, abs/2009.03300,
     2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.03300.
[33] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xi-
     angru Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark
     Gerstein, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Toolllm: Facilitating large language mod-
     els to master 16000+ real-world apis, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.16789.
[34] Jonathan Roberts, Mohammad Reza Taesiri, Ansh Sharma, Akash Gupta, Samuel Roberts,
     Ioana Croitoru, Simion-Vlad Bogolin, Jialu Tang, Florian Langer, Vyas Raina, Vatsal Raina,
     Hanyi Xiong, Vishaal Udandarao, Jingyi Lu, Shiyang Chen, Sam Purkis, Tianshuo Yan, Wenye
     Lin, Gyungin Shin, Qiaochu Yang, Anh Totti Nguyen, David I. Atkinson, Aaditya Baranwal,
     Alexandru Coca, Mikah Dang, Sebastian Dziadzio, Jakob D. Kunz, Kaiqu Liang, Alexander
     Lo, Brian Pulfer, Steven Walton, Charig Yang, Kai Han, and Samuel Albanie. ZeroBench: An
     impossible visual benchmark for contemporary large multimodal models, 2025. URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2502.09696.
[35] [Author] Srivastava et al. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capa-
     bilities of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.
[36] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto,
     Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating
     large language models trained on code, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
     arXiv preprint, arXiv:2107.03374.
[37] Jeremy Austin, Augustus Odena, et al. Program synthesis with large language models, 2021.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2108.07732.
[38] Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo,
     Collin Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, et al. Measuring coding challenge
     competence with apps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
     Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.09938.
[39] Dario Amodei and Danny Hernandez. Ai and compute, 2018. URL https://openai.com/
     blog/ai-and-compute/. OpenAI blog post, May 16, 2018.
[40] Epoch AI.   Data on notable AI models, 2024.             URL https://epoch.ai/data/
     notable-ai-models. Accessed: 2025-03-04.
[41] Jaime Sevilla, Lennart Heim, Anson Ho, Tamay Besiroglu, Marius Hobbhahn, and Pablo Vil-
     lalobos. Compute trends across three eras of machine learning. In 2022 International Joint
     Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2022.
[42] Andy K Zhang, Neil Perry, Riya Dulepet, Joey Ji, Celeste Menders, Justin W Lin, Eliot Jones,
     Gashon Hussein, Samantha Liu, Donovan Jasper, et al. Cybench: A framework for evaluating
     cybersecurity capabilities and risks of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08926,
     2024.
[43] Hao Song and Peter Flach. Efficient and robust model benchmarks with item response theory
     and adaptive testing. International Journal of Interactive Multimedia and Artificial Intelli-
     gence, 2021.
[44] Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Ngoc-Quan Pham, Raffaella
     Bernardi, Sandro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernández. The LAM-
     BADA dataset: Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context. In Proceedings of the
     54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
     pers), pages 1525–1534, 2016.


                                               13
[45] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
     Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
     solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
[46] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan
     Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, 2023. URL https://
     arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629.
[47] Alex Kipnis, Konstantinos Voudouris, Luca M. Schulze Buschoff, and Eric Schulz. metabench
     – a sparse benchmark of reasoning and knowledge in large language models, 2025. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12844.
[48] Ege Erdil and Tamay Besiroglu. Algorithmic progress in computer vision, 2023. URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2212.05153.
[49] Anson Ho, Tamay Besiroglu, Ege Erdil, David Owen, Robi Rahman, Zifan Carl Guo, David
     Atkinson, Neil Thompson, and Jaime Sevilla. Algorithmic progress in language models, 2024.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.05812.
[50] Zhengyao Jiang, Dominik Schmidt, Dhruv Srikanth, Dixing Xu, Ian Kaplan, Deniss Ja-
     cenko, and Yuxiang Wu. AIDE: Ai-driven exploration in the space of code. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2502.13138, 2025.
[51] METR.     Measuring automated kernel engineering. https://metr.org/blog/
     2025-02-14-measuring-automated-kernel-engineering/, 02 2025.
[52] David Malin Roodman. On the probability distribution of long-term changes in the growth
     rate of the global economy: An outside view, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
     org/CorpusID:221641799.




                                               14
A     Expanded Related work

Below, we expand on our discussion of related work in Section 1.1.


A.1   Agent and capability benchmarks

The evaluation of AI capabilities has evolved significantly from single-task benchmarks to complex,
multi-step evaluations designed to assess agent-like behavior. While traditional benchmarks such
as GLUE [30], SuperGLUE [31], and MMLU [32] have provided valuable insights into language
model performance, they primarily measure static knowledge rather than the dynamic problem-
solving capabilities essential for real-world applications. Recent work has developed more complex
agent benchmarks. AgentBench [9] evaluates agents across diverse environments including web
browsing, coding, and game playing. MLAgentBench [14] and MLEBench [15] focus specifically
on machine learning research tasks, while ToolBench [33; 10] assesses tool use capabilities. The
recent ZeroBench [34] involve difficult reasoning, but in the context of visual puzzles rather than
economically valuable tasks. Other noteworthy benchmarks include GAIA [11], which evaluates
reasoning across multiple modalities, and BIG-bench [35], which contains hundreds of diverse tasks
including many requiring multi-step reasoning.
Software engineering has emerged as a particularly informative domain for evaluating AI capabil-
ities. HumanEval [36] and MBPP [37] provide programming challenges of varying complexity,
while more complex benchmarks like SWE-bench [28] and APPS [38] test more sophisticated pro-
gramming abilities. We use SWE-bench Verified [7]’s human time estimates for task completion
in our work. RE-Bench [2], which we use in this work, evaluates models on complex research
engineering tasks that may require hours of human effort and compares AI performance to human
machine learning engineers. SWE-Lancer [17] generates tasks
While these benchmarks provide valuable insights into specific capabilities, they often lack a unified
metric that allows for tracking progress over time and comparing models of vastly different capabil-
ities. Our time horizon approach aims to address this gap by providing a continuous metric that can
be used to measure progress across different capability levels.


A.2   Forecasting AI progress

Quantitative forecasting of AI progress has employed various approaches, often starting with the
observation that the compute used in AI training has increased dramatically over time. Amodei
and Hernandez [39] observed that AI training compute usage has been increasing exponentially,
doubling approximately every 3.4 months between 2012 and 2018; Epoch AI [40] included more
recent data as well as trends in training dataset size and energy usage.
Other work has studied how AI performance has increased over time, relating benchmark perfor-
mance to release date, compute usage, and other inputs. Sevilla et al. [41] found that compute usage
growth rate increased at the start of the “deep learning era” in 2010, coinciding with increases in
performance. More recently, Owen [19] and Pimpale et al. [20] use compute and other metrics to
forecast future benchmark performance.
Several recent efforts have been made to contextualize AI benchmark performance. One such effort
is the annual AI Index Report [6], which tracks performance across various benchmarks, including
the date at which models achieved human-level performance. Murray et al. [18] had cybersecurity
experts relate AI performance on Cybench [42] to the ability to autonomously develop malware.
Phuong et al. [3] commissioned professional forecasters to predict whether AI ranks amongst top
public concerns by 2030, conditioned on benchmark performance. These efforts generally lack a
unified, quantitative metric for cross-benchmark comparison.
Carlsmith [22] and Cotra [23] developed the “bio-anchors” framework, in which they related the
compute involved in training AI models to the “effective horizon length” of tasks required for AI
to have transformative impacts. Ngo [21] proposed using the time horizon for which AI systems
outperform most human experts at most tasks to measure general AI capabilities. In our work, we
empirically evaluate the relationship between task duration and AI agent success rate, which we
convert into a quantitative metric of AI agent performance.


                                                 15
A.3      Psychometric methods and Item Response Theory

Our methodological approach draws inspiration from psychometric testing, particularly Item Re-
sponse Theory (IRT) [24], which models the relationship between latent traits (such as ability) and
observed responses to test items. In traditional IRT, item difficulty is a parameter in a logistic model
predicting response correctness based on respondent ability. Our approach inverts this, using task
completion time (a proxy for difficulty) to predict AI performance. Our methodology also relates to
difficulty estimation techniques in educational testing [25], where multiple metrics including com-
pletion time are used to estimate the difficulty of tasks. IRT has been applied to machine learning
classifiers by Martı́nez-Plumed et al. [26], and was used to design efficient benchmarks in Song and
Flach [43].

B        Task suite details
As with most benchmarks, the three task suites we study were designed to isolate a specific unit of
work that can be reliably accomplished within a time limit. This usually means that the tasks require
much less context than the average task in the middle of a larger project.10 We confirmed that all
tasks were possible given the instructions provided by having humans successfully complete each
task at least once.11

B.1      Task subsuites

The HCAST and SWAA suites are divided into task families, which are groups of tasks that are
similar. For example, the “crossword” task family consists of tasks such as creating a 3x3 crossword
puzzle, or a 5x5 crossword puzzle, etc. We segment tasks into families because performance within
families is correlated and we down-weight families with many tasks for diversity.

B.1.1      HCAST suite
We use 97 tasks from 46 task families in HCAST, a diverse set of challenges in cybersecurity,
machine learning, software engineering, and general reasoning.
Tasks in this suite range from easy tasks that take humans a couple of minutes (e.g. looking up a
basic factual question on Wikipedia) to tasks that take expert humans multiple hours (e.g. writing
CUDA kernels, or fixing a subtle bug in PyTorch). Because modern frontier AI systems are relatively
more proficient at text-based tasks, the majority of these tasks do not require visual/multimodal
capabilities, and all tasks are solvable by text editing via a bash shell.
Compared to many recent benchmarks, tasks in HCAST are not designed to be as difficult as possible
for either human domain professionals or current AI systems. Instead, most tasks are designed to be
realistic, such that doing well on the task requires skills we expect to be economically useful. As a
result, we expect that most of these tasks are solvable by humans with a few years of professional
experience in the relevant domain.
Tasks are defined by their instructions, starter resources, and an algorithmic scoring function. Task
instructions are strings, typically between 1-2 sentences and a few paragraphs, although they can
refer to other sources of information included as starter resources, or externally available via the
internet. Starter resources typically consist of code, data, and documentation.
Each task is automatically scored between 0 and 1, with higher scores indicating better performance.
Many tasks only return scores of 0 or 1, but for tasks with continuous scoring, we manually define a
success threshold score, which we use in some of our analysis to binarize agent scores.12
    10
      We define context as information that experienced employees use to complete a task which is not explicitly
in the task description or possessed by most external experts. For example, when fixing a bug in a software
package, the package’s maintainer may use their experience with past bugs in the same package to guess at the
bug’s cause, fluency with the codebase to find the bug, and knowledge of their organization’s priorities to decide
whether to apply a quick patch or a more thorough fix. We discuss possible effects of context in Section 4.
   11
      As many of these attempts were done by in-house staff or were done using different methodology, we
exclude these attempts from our human baseline numbers.
   12
      A small subset of these tasks is available on request. (We do not share the content of most tasks to reduce
the likelihood of AI systems accidentally or intentionally being trained on them.)


                                                       16
Figure 7: Stacked histogram of tasks by difficulty rating. HCAST mainly includes tasks longer than
4 minutes, while we focused on tasks in the 2-second to 15-second range with SWAA in order to
measure GPT-2 and GPT-3. There is a gap between the two which limits our ability to measure time
horizons in this range.


More details about HCAST tasks are provided in Rein et al. [8].

B.1.2   RE-Bench suite
RE-Bench consists of 7 challenging open-ended ML research engineering environments, each of
which are intended to take a human expert approximately 8 hours to complete. See Wijk et al. [2]
for more details.

B.1.3   Software atomic actions (SWAA) suite
HCAST is designed to be a diverse set of tasks, but the shortest tasks are around 1 minute long, lim-
iting both the representativeness and the achievable resolution in measuring AI agent performance
on shorter tasks. To fill this gap, we observed that real-world intellectual labor consists in part of
measurable, single-step actions shorter than 1 minute. We created the SWAA task suite, which com-
prises 66 small tasks corresponding to <1 minute atomic actions commonly performed in software
engineering work. The SWAA subset includes both multiple-choice and completion questions.
   Example SWAA task (file selection)

   Which file is most likely to have a password in it ?
       1. credentials . txt
       2. installation_notes . txt
       3. main . py
       4. launcher_win . exe

In contrast to other simple benchmarks like LAMBADA [44] or GSM8K [45], which test skills not
directly applicable to software engineering, the SWAA set represents actions that are needed in both
software engineering work and the longer tasks we study. SWAA consists of 5 task families, three
representing common decisions, one for code completion, and one for math; see Appendix B.1.3 for
more details.
Development of SWAA tasks was blind to AI agent performance; that is, all tasks were written
before seeing AI attempts, and elicitation (development of the few-shot prompt used for evaluation)
was carried out on a separate development task suite.
SWAA consists of five task families: three representing common decisions, one for code completion,
and one for math.

Decisions (multiple choice)


                                                 17
                                Figure 8: The 7 original RE-Bench tasks.


       • File selection: Which file has a certain property, or is appropriate to read in a situation?
       • Alert triage: Which team at a company should investigate an alert?
       • Request routing: Which action needs to be taken in response to some request?

Fill-in-the-blank

       • Code completion: Complete a single word of code.
       • Math: Solve simple arithmetic problems, either standalone or software engineering-themed
         word problems.

When developing SWAA tasks, we attempted to avoid biasing the results by blinding task authors
to model performance, so the preliminary set of 71 tasks was written without running any models
on them during development. These were filtered down to the final set of 66 by excluding tasks that
more than one baseliner failed.

RE-Bench      See Figure 8 for a description of the RE-Bench tasks.13

B.2   Limitations of the task suite

The tasks we use to benchmark AI capabilities are systematically different from real tasks. These
differences could result in the trends we observe on these tasks not generalizing to real world tasks.
For instance, all SWAA, HCAST, and RE-Bench differ from real-world tasks in the following ways:
  13
     The Restricted MLM task involves ML engineering while prohibiting certain PyTorch methods; current
models sometimes use these prohibited methods in an indirect way such that the cheating can’t be automatically
detected, but model cheating does not meaningfully affect our results.


                                                     18
          • Automatic scoring All tasks we use are automatically scorable, meaning a piece of code
            running in the task environment determines the final score. This imposes constraints on e.g.
            the format of solutions, that tend to reduce task open-endedness, and the need for sensible
            value judgments.
          • No interaction with other agents No tasks involve interacting with other autonomous
            agents. Coordinating with, or competing with, other agents seems likely to increase task
            difficulty. For instance, by increasing the importance of strategic decision-making, real-
            time coordination, and predicting the actions of other complex agents.
          • Lax resource constraints No SWAA tasks, and few HCAST tasks saliently involve making
            efficient use of a limited resource—a common constraint in real-world tasks.
          • Unpunishing Similarly, very few tasks are punishing of single mistakes.14 This is in part to
            reduce the expected cost of collecting human baselines. Real world tasks can often be more
            punishing, for instance, when they involve competing against other agents. For instance, a
            single blunder in a chess game can greatly reduce the chance of winning the game.
          • Static environments Tasks in this suite typically use environments that do not significantly
            change unless directly acted upon by the agent. In contrast, real tasks often occur in the
            context of a changing environment.

We attempted to measure how these systematic differences might affect AI agent performance in
Section F.2, by including the above properties as “messiness” factors. We found that though the
absolute performance on “messier” tasks was lower, the trends in performance were similar to less
messy tasks.


C        Methodological details

C.1      Human baselines

C.1.1      HCAST tasks
We use existing baselines collected as part of HCAST. These baselines are collected from domain
professionals with relevant experience in software engineering, ML, and cybersecurity. Baseliners
work in the same environment as agents, using Vivaria (an open source platform for language model
agent evals) with their screens and audio recorded for manual review, to prevent cheating. They
are incentivized with bonuses for successful completion and for completing tasks faster than other
baseliners. After screening out attempts on tasks other than our subset of HCAST, failed attempts,
and those with issues (such as using disallowed AI tools), we include 286 successful baselines
from approximately 460 total attempts. Task durations are calculated using the geometric mean of
successful baselines, with manual estimates for tasks lacking successful baselines.15
For further information about HCAST baselines, see Rein et al. [8].

C.1.2      RE-Bench baselines
For RE-Bench, we used the baselines from [2]. As baseliners were instructed to achieve the best
performance for each task, we consider the task duration of each of these 6 tasks as 8 hours, and
instead use the mean score achieved by baseliners who spent between 7 and 9 hours to convert raw
score into success threshold.
Baselines for RE-Bench were conducted with the same baseliner pool and incentives as with
HCAST, but with a few differences. Rather than being told to achieve a threshold score, base-
liners were given a fixed time limit of 8 hours and instructed to maximize their score; the threshold
was set based on average baseliner performance. RE-Bench baseliners had access to AI tools, so the
human scores on these tasks may be biased upwards.

    14
     With the exception of submitting an answer too early on HCAST tasks.
    15
     Non-baseline estimates were based on information including the length of QA runs that did not follow
strict baseline conditions, and the length of similar tasks with successful baselines.


                                                    19
C.1.3     SWAA baselines
Unlike HCAST and RE-Bench, which were baselined by external contractors, SWAA is baselined
by internal employees with relevant expertise using a custom webapp that enables more accurate
timing. Because these tasks are intended to be a single step and exclude context acquisition, the
timer for SWAA tasks ends as soon as the user chooses a response. For decision based tasks, only
one selection is allowed to avoid random guessing; for fill in the blank tasks, baseliners can try
multiple times until getting the answer correctly or opting to skip. We baselined each decision-
based task 4 times and each fill-in-the-blank style task 3 times.
Unlike the HCAST and RE-Bench sets, SWAA is baselined by internal employees with relevant ex-
pertise using a custom webapp that enables more accurate timing. Because these tasks are intended
to be a single step and exclude context acquisition, the timer for SWAA tasks starts after reading
general instructions and ends as soon as the user chooses a response, so that baseline time only in-
cludes reading the question itself and choosing an answer. Baselines done with our usual setup have
timing overhead of seconds to tens of seconds, which would be unacceptably high for single-step
tasks with duration shorter than 2 seconds.

C.1.4     Baseline success rate
We aggregate human baseline times into a task length rating by taking the geometric mean time of
successful baseline runs, which is more predictive of model performance than mean time because
baseline times are roughly log-normally distributed.
We chose to filter successful runs for two main reasons - one practical and one principled. Firstly,
collecting enough baselines to estimate the time-versus-success curve for each task would be prac-
tically difficult. Secondly, we wanted to exclude cases where the baseline failed for reasons that are
not applicable to models. A substantial fraction of human failures appeared to fall in this category -
including humans having insufficient expertise for the task, or giving up on a task for unclear reasons
(possibly due to getting interrupted, or getting bored). In particular, because we were optimizing for
obtaining successful baselines, our payment scheme incentivized contractors to make a quick guess
or give up early, in order to move on to other tasks where their expected earnings were higher.
However, conditioning on success biases towards shorter task length ratings, thereby underestimat-
ing model performance. This is especially the case if many of the human failures are due to problems
that are also relevant for models - for example, if some of the tasks require guessing. This bias is
most significant on longer tasks, which often have a baseliner success rate below 50%; therefore,
we have lower confidence in the difficulty ratings of these longer tasks, and expect they may be
underestimates. If this is the case, we may be underestimating the pace of model improvement.

Human time horizon An alternative approach would be to calculate the human time horizon using
the same methodology as we do for models. One natural interpretation of time horizon would imply
that the time horizon of “a human given x hours” is x hours. Since our baseliners were paid for
spending up to 8 hours per task, we would expect their time horizon to be around 8 hours. However,
in practice it’s much lower, at around 1.5 hours (which would imply that the best models will surpass
humans in under 7 months). As discussed above, we think this is artificially low, given that many
human failures seemed to be artifacts of our incentive scheme.
Figure 9 shows a graph of baseliner success rate by task length.

C.1.5     Baseline time analysis
We manually watched and annotated the recordings of 50 baselines to get a sense of how our base-
liners spent their time. Based on this small survey of baselines:
        1. On short (5-15 minute) tasks, a substantial fraction of the time (between 25–75%) is spent
           reading instructions or understanding how to submit correctly. Particularly for short tasks,
           our time estimates may be hard to interpret as there is some fixed overhead for reading the
           instructions, independent of the difficulty of actually performing the task per se.
        2. Our tasks are designed to require relatively low amounts of context but base liners still
           spend over 25% of their time reminding themselves of relevant information (e.g. how to do
           port forwarding).


                                                   20
Figure 9: Success rates and time horizon of human baseliners. Note that the time horizon is not
directly comparable to the time horizon of ML models (see Section C.1.4)



C.2   Internal PR tasks

Summary We ran GPT-4o, Claude 3.5 Sonnet (New), and o1 on five uncontaminated issues from
an internal repository. Resolving these issues was real work performed by internal staff, so we
might expect results on these tasks to better represent performance on real economically valuable
tasks than a typical benchmark task.
We find that our contract baseliners take 5x-18x longer to resolve issues than repository maintainers.
Additionally, AI agent performance on these issues is not inconsistent with AI agent success rate
curves derived from HCAST, SWAA, and RE-Bench performance if contractor time-to-complete
is used to measure the tasks length. However, it takes much longer for our contract baseliners to
complete these tasks than repository maintainers. This suggests that time horizons may have better
correspondence to the labor of a low-context human, rather than a high-context human.



Methodology We collected five real, recent, uncontaminated issues from an internal repository.
We then ran GPT-4o, Claude 3.5 Sonnet (New), and o1 on these issues. We recorded how long
it took repository maintainers to solve these issues, and also had external baseliners attempt to fix
these issues. Unlike SWE-bench Verified, we did no filtering to require these issues to be automati-
cally verifiable. Instead, maintainers of the relevant repository scored model and baseliner solutions
manually, as if they were reviewing PRs:


      1. 0 if the PR was incorrect and required a fundamental refactor.


      2. 0.25 if there were minor changes that must be made before merging.


      3. 0.75 if there were nits but the PR could still be merged.


      4. 1.0 if the PR could be merged as is.



Example issues We include two example issues - one easy (Issue 1), and the other (Issue 8) more
challenging. Issue 8 demonstrates how context on the codebase may provide a dramatic speedup in
human time to complete between baseliners and repository maintainers. Results of these baselines
can be seen in table 3.


                                                 21
                        Issue   Agent                      Time taken Score
                        1       Repository Maintainer        5 minutes       1.0
                                Baseliner                   81 minutes       1.0
                        8       Repository Maintainer 20 minutes             1.0
                                Baseliner                  113 minutes      0.25
                         Table 3: Results of baselines on selected internal PRs


   Issue 1
   The stage p l ot _ l o gi s t i c_ i n d iv i d u al with the error message :
   ‘‘‘
   FileNotFoundError : [ Errno 2] No such file or directory :
   ’ plots / logistic_individual / invsqrt_task_weight -0.01. png ’
   ERROR : failed to reproduce ’
   pl ot _l ogi st ic _in di vi dua l@ in vsq rt _t as k_w ei gh t -0.01 ’:
   failed to run : python -m src . plot . logistic_individual -- input -
   file data / wrangled / l o g i s t i c _ r e g r e s s i o n _ i n v s q r t _ t a s k _ w e i g h t _ 0 .01
   _ftr . csv
   -- output - file plots / logistic_individual / invsqrt_task_weight -0.01.
   png
   -- plot - format png -- log - level INFO , exited with 1

   ‘‘‘

   Issue 8
   Reweighting in bootstrapping
   Currently the hierarchical bootstrapping does not reweight runs .


                        Task ID       GPT-4o        Claude 3.5 Sonnet              o1
                        Issue 1        0.35 (5)         0.45 (5)               0.875 (6)
                        Issue 8         0.0 (5)          0.0 (5)                 0.0 (5)
                        Issue 9-1       0.0 (5)          0.0 (5)                 0.0 (5)
                        Issue 9-2       0.0 (5)          1.0 (5)                0.85 (5)
                        Issue 10        0.0 (5)          0.0 (5)                 0.0 (5)
                        Issue 11      0.02 (12)         0.0 (11)                 0.0 (8)

Table 4: Internal PR Per-Task Average Scores (number of trials in parentheses). Note that we did
minimal processing on Issue 9 to turn it into two issues, as in practice the issue description contained
two entirely separate pieces of work.




Repo maintainer time vs. baseliner time There was a dramatic difference in how long it took
baseliners to complete issues, compared to how long it took repository maintainers to complete
issues (Table C.2). In practice, repo maintainers were 5-18x faster at completing the given issues.

   Task ID                         Maintainer Time (min)           Baseliner Time (min)          Slowdown
   eval-analysis-public-1                     5                         81 (score 1)                16x
   eval-analysis-public-8                    20                       113 (score .25)              ∼5.5x
   eval-analysis-public-9-1                 235                               -                      -
   eval-analysis-public-9-2                   5                        69 (score 1)*                14x
   eval-analysis-public-10                   20                               -                      -
   eval-analysis-public-11                    5                        93 (score .75)              18.6x

   *Note: This was run on a slight variant
             Table 5: Comparison of time to fix issues by repo maintainers and baseliners



                                                       22
                             Model                        Agent
                             Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Old)      modular-public
                             Claude 3.5 Sonnet (New)      modular-public
                             Claude 3 Opus                modular-public
                             davinci-002                  modular-public
                             gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct       modular-public
                             GPT-4 0314                   modular-public
                             GPT-4 0125                   modular-public
                             GPT-4 1106                   modular-public
                             GPT-4 Turbo                  modular-public
                             GPT-4o                       modular-public
                             o1                           triframe
                             o1-preview                   duet

                     Table 6: Scaffolding used for or each model in this report



Manual scoring methods and results Maintainer, baseliner, and model solutions were manually
scored as if they were pull requests. We experimented with both contractors scoring PRs, as well
as different repository maintainers scoring PRs. In practice, repo maintainers scored results much
more consistently than contractors. Contractor correlations were between 50–60%. Repo maintainer
correlations were between 88–91% .

Time to score For models to be cost competitive on real work, their total cost to complete a PR
must be less than the cost for a repository maintainer to implement this PR themselves (plus ancil-
liary costs, e.g. the time of a code reviewer). As such, we kept track of the time that it took to score
model solutions, to better understand the net cost of using a model to fix a real issue. Repo main-
tainers scored submissions much faster than contractors, although the ratio was less dramatic than
time to complete—contractors took an average of 8 minutes per run, while repo maintainers took
an average of 3.5 minutes per run. Different issues had different average times to score, with easier
issues generally being much quicker to score, and all issues being faster to score than to complete.
In the future, we plan to create an approximate cost metric that takes into account scoring effort,
model cost, and model success rate. We expect that this will be a useful framing in understanding
how the ratio of model / maintainer work may shift in the future, as the cost of agent usage continues
to fall.

Contract baseliners vs repository maintainers Model success rates were reasonably consistent
with those predicted by contract baseliner times. In practice, baseliners also did much worse on easy
tasks than experienced maintainers. Issue 11, for example, took a baseliner upwards of 1.5 hours to
complete, and so we would not expect models to consistently complete this task.

Qualitative impressions Naively comparing to per-time bucket success rates on HCAST + SWAA
+ RE-bench tasks, repository maintainer time-to-complete is not a good predictor of model perfor-
mance on these tasks. For example, Issue 11 was the simplest task for maintainers. It requires
writing simple comments across 10 Python files, and it took maintainers less than five minutes to
complete. However, models did not successfully complete the task successfully once in 30 runs.
There were also tasks where models did succeed, as we would expect from per-time bucket success
rates on other tasks. For example, models were consistently able to add a missing folder creation
step to a single stage in a data pipeline. While baseliners and models both struggle compared to
repository maintainers, they struggle in different ways. Baseliners often lacked knowledge about the
tools and techniques used in the codebase: e.g. “what is DVC?” or “what is bootstrapping again?”.
Current AI models, on the other hand, consistently demonstrate knowledge of tools and techniques,
but appear to struggle with the larger context required for working in a real codebase.

C.3   How models were run

All models were run using agent scaffolds using the Anthropic or OpenAI APIs.


                                                  23
We used the same agent scaffolds across the evaluation suite, with no task-specific prompting or
scaffolding, except for the SWAA tasks, which used a simple prompting scaffold. All agents were
provided with the same affordances provided to human baseliners.
GPT-2 is incompatible with our scaffolding due to low context length, so we imputed a score of zero
for GPT-2 on all tasks in RE-Bench and HCAST. We think this is reasonable because the far more
capable davinci-002 (GPT-3) scores zero on this set. Removing these imputed GPT-2 zero scores
has a negligible effect on all subsequent results in this paper.

C.3.1    Scaffold and platform details
Most AI models were evaluated with modular-public—a basic agent scaffold. This scaffold provides
the model with Python and Bash commands and some very simple context management to keep
the input within the context window length of the LM. We used a slightly different scaffold for
o1-preview and o1, because they seemed to struggle with tool use, responding to environmental
feedback, and generally acting as an agent.
For both human baselines and AI agent runs, our experiments use the open-source platform Vivaria.
CPU and GPU resources are provided inside the secure VMs based on the resource specifications of
tasks. Table 6 displays the scaffolding used for each model. Both modular-public and triframe/duet
incorporate principles from the ReAct framework [46], which interleaves reasoning traces with ac-
tions. These agents are developed on a held-out dev set of tasks, not included in HCAST, to reduce
the likelihood of overfitting to these tasks. See the respective repositories for implementation details
about these scaffolds.
Both scaffolds allow agents to plan via chain-of-thought reasoning, before calling a selection of
tools. The agents interact with their task environment primarily through running Python code and
Bash commands.
In Modular, the model generates a single command for execution, then the scaffold executes the
function call, returning relevant information from the environment (e.g. STDOUT/STDERR). This
process repeats until either the model determines that the answer is ready for submission or the
system reaches its predefined usage threshold.
In Triframe, to decide on a command to execute, the model generates one suggested plan, then gen-
erates three possible commands to execute based on the plan, as well as three suggested commands
that ignore the plan (to diversify the ideas it generates). Then, the model generates two scores
between -2 and 2 for each of the six proposed actions, and the scaffold executes the top scoring
function call averaged across the two scores.

C.3.2    Compute usage
The total amount of compute used included about 2,000 H100-hours for RE-Bench environments
and 50,000 CPU hours for other environments on a combination of cloud and internal machines,
plus roughly 50,000 H100-hour equivalents of compute used internally or from API providers for
inference. This includes compute used for preliminary experiments. Compute used for data analysis
is minimal.

C.4     Comparison to Item Response Theory

Item response theory (IRT) is a collection of statistical techniques used to predict the probability
that a person will answer a question correctly, based on their ability level. The standard IRT two-
parameter logistic (2PL) model is (simplified from Cai et al.):
                               Ti (1|ηagent ) = σ((ηagent − αtask ) · βtask )

Where Ti (1|ηagent ) indicates the probability that a person with ability level ηagent answers a task
correctly. 16 IRT is usually used to regress on both the question difficulty and the ability level
  16
    In the three-parameter logistic model, a parameter γtask is added representing the probability of correctly
guessing the task. In the 2PL model and our method, γtask = 0. This is effectively true for most tasks, but
some SWAA tasks are multiple-choice with a 25% chance of guessing correctly. This choice only affects the
time horizon of GPT-2 and GPT-3 and does not meaningfully affect our results.


                                                      24
simultaneously; in contrast, we define the question difficulty as the logarithm of human baseline
time, and therefore only regress on ability level. In particular, our model is as follows.

                        Ti (1|hagent ) = σ((log hagent − log ttask ) · βagent )                    (1)
Note the following changes from the 2PL model:

      1. αtask = log ttask where ttask is the geometric mean of successful human baseline times.
      2. ηagent can now be interpreted as log hagent where hagent is the 50% time horizon of the
         agent rather than an abstract ability parameter. This is because when hagent = ttask , our
         model predicts a success probability of σ(0 · βagent ) = σ(0) = 0.5.
      3. βagent is an agent-dependent learned parameter, rather than being task-dependent.

To√fit equation 1, we weight tasks by diversity, such that a task from a family of size n gets weight
1/ n. We then use logistic regression to fit the time horizon hagent and slope βagent for each
model. For example, following this methodology o1 has a time horizon of about 39 minutes (see
Figure 4).
These changes allow us to compute an interpretable time horizon without several complexities of
IRT. First, IRT has an initial calibration/joint optimization stage in which the task difficulty is es-
timated from all agent scores, so the ability score of one agent may depend on other agents’ per-
formance; in our method each agent’s time horizon is computed individually. Second, IRT outputs
”ability scores” which then need to be converted to a time horizon estimate; our method eliminates
that step by estimating horizon directly. Third, the 2PL model uses one slope parameter per task,
whereas we use one slope parameter per agent. In our setting with many fewer agents than tasks,
this reduces the overall number of parameters.
In exchange, we forego the ability to use IRT metrics designed for test design, such as Fisher infor-
mation functions for individual tasks (used in e.g. Kipnis et al. [47]). Future improved methodolo-
gies could include these metrics to design sample-efficient benchmarks and evaluations grounded in
human data.

D     Qualitative analysis
D.1   Failure categories

To better understand the differences between current and older AI agent failures, we separately
sampled 31 unsuccessful agent runs from our GPT-4 1106 agent and 32 unsuccessful runs from our
o1 agent, and manually labeled them for the following exclusive categories of failures:
       • Poor planning and tool choice: the agent generates a high level plan that seems unwork-
         able on its own merits, or picks tools for the plan that would not accomplish the desired
         purpose.
       • Incorrect mental math or reasoning: the agent performs incorrect mental math or logical
         reasoning at a crucial step, causing the run to fail.
       • Premature task abandonment: The agent abandons the task in the middle of the attempt
         and either submits a nonsensical answer or submits a solution without checking for cor-
         rectness. These failures often result from the agent submitting their answer before looking
         at all the pieces of code or information required to arrive at the correct solution.
       • Repeating failed actions: The agent repeats the same behavior that doesn’t make progress
         toward the problem, such as running a command that leads to an error over and over again,
         without trying other approaches.
We report the results in Table 3.3. We find that over a third of the GPT-4 failures resulted from
repeating failed actions, compared to 2 out of 32 for o1, which we see as quantitative evidence for
our claim that models seem to have improved in their ability to adapt to mistakes. Half of the o1
failures resulted from abandoning the task prematurely, while only a quarter of the GPT-4 failures
resulted from the same—this may result from o1 failures occurring on qualitatively more difficult
tasks, or may reflect idiosyncrasies of o1.


                                                  25
D.2     Specific skills of newer models

To better contextualize the observed trend of improved model performance, we examined the tran-
scripts for the tasks where earlier models (e.g. GPT-4) do substantially worse than current models.
Specifically, we categorized all task families based on the type of expertise required, and noticed
that current models tend to outperform earlier models for tasks that involved ML training, reverse
engineering compiled software binaries, and cybersecurity CTFs. In addition, we noticed that agents
improved greatly on tasks requiring situational awareness of the AI agent’s limitations or defeating
an opposing strategy. This gave us five sets of task families to examine.
For each of these task family sets, we then used contractors to manually read through all runs from
all models for all tasks in each of these five task families, and identified possible explanations for
the improvement in AI agent performance on those tasks, as well as potential limitations.
We provide examples of both ways that models have improved, as well as their major limitations, as
described in Section 3.3.

D.2.1     What do newer models do better?
We start by discussing some of the ways in which current models have improved compared to pre-
2023 models. For some of our public tasks, we also provide links to the transcripts of the full runs.

Greater robustness to mistakes Models have become increasingly robust over time, and espe-
cially seem to be able to avoid repeating failed actions. Early models typically fail to correct even
trivial mistakes, instead engaging in looping behavior or introducing additional errors. However,
starting with GPT-4o, models demonstrate improved ability to recover from mistakes and course-
correct, an ability that is especially valuable in the harder variants of the pico ctf tasks, or other
coding related tasks that require iteration. Consider examples from a task where models need to
debug a small amount of Python code:

        1. In one run gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09 introduced syntax errors related to having a misplaced
           backslash character in a Python file, and despite copious attempts is unable to understand
           or fix the issue until it gives up.
        2. Claude 3.5 Sonnet (New) first adds code at the wrong place, and then attempts several
           times to add the code to the correct file using the CLI tool sed. However, when doing so
           it encounters IndentationErrors and duplicated methods. Finally it successfully pivots to
           writing the entire file from scratch.

                 Agent output

                      I apologize for the confusion . It seems that
                      our previous attempt didn ’ t fully remove the
                      old ‘ save ‘ method . Let ’ s try one more time to
                       fix the ‘ base_model . py ‘ file . We ’ ll remove
                      both ‘ save ‘ methods and add the correct one
                      ...

                 Agent output

                      I apologize for the persistent issue . It
                      seems that our previous attempts didn ’ t fully
                       resolve the problem . Let ’ s try one more time
                       to fix the ‘ base_model . py ‘ file by
                      completely rewriting the content of the file :
                      ...


Tool use Early models like davinci-002 (GPT-3) struggle with syntactically correct tool use, while
later models improved with clear explanations and examples in their prompt. Current frontier models
generally use the tools afforded in our scaffolding without issue. For example, we noticed that when
tasks required editing Python scripts, GPT-3 struggled with formatting even when provided explicit


                                                  26
instructions, and GPT-4o would sometimes write scripts line-by-line using echo commands in bash,
while o1-preview would consistently edit files efficiently.

     1. Despite the reminder in the user message about the expected format, davinci-002 fails to
        use the correct syntax with angle brackets.

            User
            No function call was included in the
            last message . Please include a
            function call in the next message
            using the <[ tool_name ] > [ args ] </[
            tool_name ] > syntax .


              Agent output

              bash > touch test . txt
              python > import time
              python > time . sleep (10)
              python > exit ()
              submit > python main . py

     2. GPT-4o sometimes struggles to write the Python script effectively. In a run on the same
        task, it ineffectively writes each line of the script with a separate command.

              Agent ouptut

              I will write the script content directly into the
               script file using echo commands , one line at a
              time .
              bash : {" command ":
                " echo ‘ def read_nth_line ( file_path , n ) : ’ >>
                update_test_txt . py "}
              bash : {" command ":
                " echo ‘     with open ( file_path , " r ") as file : ’
                >> update_test_txt . py "}

     3. o1-preview consistently edits files on this task without any issue.

Improved logical and programmatic problem solving Consistent with increasing performance
on coding and reasoning benchmarks, we saw models’ ability to write syntactically and semantically
correct code gradually increase. This allowed models to more reliably interpret task instructions
correctly and use code to find correct answers.

     1. For example, on the interpret data task, GPT-4o fails in one run due to an incorrect inter-
        pretation of the request to find “the tallest building in the world in 1972” as finding “the
        tallest building in the world built in 1972”, as opposed to the common sense interpretation
        that the task is to find the tallest building in the world in 1972. For example, it writes code
        like:

              Agent Output

              tal lest _buil ding _1972 = data [ data [ ’
              completion_year ’] == 1972][ ’ height_m ’]. max ()
              tal lest _buil ding _1972

     2. In contrast, o1-preview correctly interprets the request as finding the tallest building in the
        world built in or before 1972.


                                                 27
D.2.2    What do they still do poorly?
Despite improvements, even current frontier models still struggle in substantial ways. In general,
our observerations indicate that agents tend to do worse on tasks that are qualitatively “messier”.
We investigate this claim further in Section F.2.

AI agents struggle without clear feedback Without clear feedback or cheap ways of verification,
such as unit tests or answer checking scripts, all models we tested often have difficulty understanding
whether their solution is correct. For example, two of the tasks hardest for models in their respective
time buckets are ‘blackbox’ and ‘symbolic regression’. Both of these tasks involve guessing a hidden
function under the constraint that probing for information is costly.

AI agents often fail to proactively seek out relevant information We also observe that all mod-
els still exhibit deficiencies in understanding their own limitations or proactively seeking out helpful
information; instead, models tend to assume that they already know how to complete the tasks and
then only reevaluate after they fail to do so.
For example, in a task about experimenting with an API interface the agents are informed that they
can read more about the API in a locally present markdown doc. Even if agents succeed, they
typically start off hallucinating or guessing the API endpoints, and only when they encounter an
error from the task environment do they read the API.
In a capture the flag task, agents have to open a file with unknown encoding in python, and often fail
on the first try because they specify an incorrect encoding. Even the best models respond by trying
out different encodings in the python script, which is inefficient and wastes tokens. We never saw
an agent running the bash file command that would identify the necessary encoding directly.

E     Further discussion
E.1     Constant factors versus slope changes

Although extrapolation is always imperfect, forecasting AI time horizons far into the future is much
more sensitive to changes in doubling rate than to constant factors in time horizon. For example, a
naive extrapolation based on o1’s time horizon of 39 minutes and a past doubling time of 218 days
(3.2x/year) predicts that AIs will reach a 1-month 50% time horizon (roughly 8 doublings over o1)
about 4.8 years after the release date of o1. A 2x increase in doubling time would delay the 1 month
point by a further 4.8 years, but a 2x constant factor decrease in time horizon would only delay it by
0.6 years.

E.2     Important factors that could change time horizon slope

Agency training Horizon growth since 2024, which may be faster than the long-term trend, could
be explained by researchers post-training models to be more agentic (that is, capable of taking
many sequential actions towards completing a task) using outcome-based RL. Research into making
models capable and agentic is likely to continue. Future agency training could be faster than the
long-run trend (since post-training may be more compute-efficient than pretraining at increasing
horizon length). But 2024–2025 agency training could also be a one-time boost from picking low-
hanging fruit, in which case horizon growth will slow once these gains are exhausted. Overall,
we think agency training is more likely to increase the time horizon growth rate compared to the
2019–2024 trend.

Compute scaling Between the release of GPT-2 and today, the compute used to train the most
impressive frontier language models has increased by at least a factor of 10,000x [40], with training
compute usage doubling every 6–10 months [41]. More recently, models like o1 and o3 have began
to use more compute at inference time. It is unclear whether there is sufficient capacity to expand
either training or inference compute by many more orders of magnitude in the next 5 years. However,
algorithmic improvements, which have historically decreased the compute requirements for a fixed
performance level [48] [49], can substitute for compute limitations. We think that limits to compute
scaling will slow the growth of AI agent time horizons somewhat, but be partially compensated by
more investment into algorithmic improvement.


                                                  28
Automation of AI R&D The main inputs to AI research and development are compute and re-
searcher time. If future AI systems are capable of substituting for human research engineers and/or
increasing the compute-efficiency of training, the rate of AI progress will increase. We think it is
likely that there will be substantial AI R&D automation once frontier AI time horizon reaches tens
of hours, shortening the time from then until one-month-horizon AI.

AGI will have “infinite” time horizon An infinite time horizon does not mean an arbitrarily
capable AI, merely the ability to complete tasks that take humans an arbitrarily long length of time.
If an artificial general intelligence (AGI) is capable of completing all tasks expert humans can with
a success rate of at least X%, its X% time horizon will necessarily be infinite. Therefore, if such
systems are ever developed, the long-term trend in time horizon will be faster than exponential, with
an asymptote at the date of AGI deployment.

E.3    Interpreting time horizon

Although time horizon is an intuitive measure of AI agent capability, measuring it requires a large
dataset annotated with human time, and time horizon is always measured relative to a task distribu-
tion and baseliners’ levels of context and skill.

Context and skill effects At real companies, junior software engineer hires often take weeks of
onboarding to begin contributing economic value. The human baseliners that determine the length
of most tasks have much less context than average employees, potentially increasing measured task
length. Our tasks are designed to require minimal context, which somewhat mitigates this problem;
our internal PRs (Section C.2) were not designed this way, and so baseliners took many times longer
than employees. However, highly skilled baseliners can also complete tasks far faster than average
employees. Our expert baseliners are likely much more skilled than the average software engineer,
potentially decreasing our measured task length.

Task distribution effects Figure 3 shows that AI agent success rate is imperfectly predicted by hu-
man time-to-complete, meaning that other factors also substantially influence the difficulty of tasks.
When models are measured in different domains of intellectual labor like research mathematics,
computational biology, or law, we expect their time horizons to differ.

Measuring extreme time horizons Accurately measuring that the X%–time horizon of an AI
agent is about t minutes requires many tasks of human length t that the AI agent completes with a
success rate of about X%. This has two implications. First, accurately measuring very long time
horizons requires a dataset of difficult tasks with long human baseline runs, which can be impractical
to construct, especially because success criteria for realistic difficult tasks are often complex enough
to require manual grading. Second, measuring time horizons at extremely high success levels– 95%,
98%, or higher– requires very large task datasets with near-zero label noise that cover the population
of tasks they are meant to represent.

Human time horizon measurements In theory, one could also measure the time horizon of a
human or population of humans. However, there are both theoretical and practical difficulties to
doing so. We discuss this more in Appendix C.1.4.

E.4    Limitations and future work

We believe that there are several ways in which our work could be improved.

More models with better elicitation In general, we find that properly eliciting models can make
a very large difference in their performance.17 We have put a limited amount of effort into eliciting
models to get good performance on our tasks, so while our results are a reasonable lower bound,
some models may have somewhat greater capabilities than we demonstrate. The most work was
done to elicit o1 and the original Claude 3.5 Sonnet, each of which had around 2-3 engineer weeks
of iterative development. All other models use the same scaffolding with at most minor changes.
  17
     This is a common obervation; see e.g. the improvements to software development capabilities from AIDE
[50] or recent work on KernelBench: [51]


                                                   29
Future work could replicate our results with more effort spent on eliciting the full capabilities of
frontier models.

More rigorous human baselining Our per-task human time estimates are likely noisy due to
relatively small sample size, and potentially also systematically skewed in various ways. Most
notably, we select only successful completions of a task, and encourage baseliners to give up on tasks
they may not complete in a reasonable amount of time. Our baseliners’ skills also vary significantly,
and a wide variety of skills are relevant to these tasks. Though we attempt to match baseliners
with appropriate tasks, this process is unlikely to be perfect. From manual reviews of baseline
attempts, we also observe that humans sometimes simply give up even when the task seems within
their capabilities, and it is unclear what selection effects are produced on the distribution of success
times as a result. See See Appendix C.1.4 for further discussion of how bias in human baseline
times could affect our results. Future work could replicate our results with more rigorous human
baseliner selection or explore how sensitive the results are to methodological choices around human
baselining.

More natural, varied tasks There are reasons to believe that our task distribution is systematically
different from the distribution of economically valuable work (and perhaps systematically different
than the distribution of risk-model relevant tasks). We explored some of these reasons in Sections 4,
but there remain many differences that we did not explore. For example, the modality of interaction
in these tasks is also relatively narrow—for example, no tasks require the use of a mouse. No tasks
require cooperating or competing with humans or other agents,18 while real software engineering
or ML research involves communicating and coordinating with managers and other engineers or
researchers. Many real-world tasks require very high reliability, and these are underrepresented in
our dataset due to the difficulty of measuring models on these tasks. Most importantly, the tasks we
study are heavily skewed toward software engineering and ML research. Future work could explore
how the capabilities of AI agents are progressing in other domains.

More use of inference compute Our scaffolds made relatively limited use of inference-time com-
pute. When assuming that the human expert is compensated at $143.61/hour (average L4 Engineer
salary at Google divided by 2,000 hours), more than 80% of successful runs cost less than 10% of
what it would cost for a human to perform the same task. (Figure 14). This implies that if inference-
time computation could be used to improve performance, there is substantial room to do so while
still remaining economically competitive with human experts. Previous research has found that tech-
niques such as best-of-k can substantially improve performance on a subset of these tasks,[2] and
better use of inference-time compute may lead to substantially different scores.

Data analysis The 2024–2025 trend appears faster than the 2019–2025 trend, but due to the small
number of models it is unclear if this is noise. Future work should include hypothesis testing to
detect a possible 2024 slope change, and more sophisticated statistical methods to create credible in-
tervals for an overall forecast. We also lose some information in the multiple stages of estimation—
conversion of baseline data to task difficulty ratings, time horizon computation, and linear regression
to find the trend—and end-to-end methods could be more data-efficient.

F        External validity details
F.1      Retrodiction from 2023–2025 data

As part of exploratory work for this paper, we measured the time horizon of 9 frontier and near-
frontier models released in 2023 and 2024, using only our HCAST and RE-Bench suites. This trend
(with Claude 3.7 Sonnet and o3 added) is shown in Figure 10: time horizon doubles about every
six months. Since we only had two 2023 models (GPT-4 0314 and GPT-4 1106) and a small data
range (release date spanning 2 years and time horizon spanning 5 doublings), error bars were very
wide. In addition, restricting our data further to 2024-only models produced a different trend with
time horizon doubling about every three months, so any extrapolation into the future would not be
robust.
    18
     See Xu et al. [12] for an example of a recent benchmark that requires multi-agent interaction in a relatively
realistic setting.


                                                       30
To address these issues, we collected more data to extend the trendline into the past, developing
the Software Atomic Actions (SWAA) suite to decrease the minimum human time of the task suite
from 1 minute to under 2 seconds, and enabling us to measure GPT-2, davinci-002 (GPT-3) and
GPT-3.5-turbo-instruct on the combined suite.
The 2023–2025 trend may be faster than the longer-term trend (Figure 11). The measured doubling
time over the whole 6 year period 2019–2025 inclusive was 207 days, which is less steep than
the 172-day trend based on data from non-SWAA tasks and 2023–2025 models. However, this
difference is still within margin of error.

F.2      Messiness factors

Real-world intellectual labor often involves messy details that benchmarks usually don’t include,
such as being under-specified or poorly scoped, having unclear feedback loops or success criteria,
or requiring coordination between multiple streams of work in real-time. We generally observed
that agents struggle more on tasks that have these “messy” details (Section 3.3). A natural question
is therefore whether agents showed similar rates of improvement on “less messy” and “more messy”
tasks.
We rated HCAST and RE-Bench tasks on 16 properties that we expected to be 1) representative
of how real world tasks might be systematically harder than tasks we study and 2) relevant to AI
agent performance. Some example factors include whether the task involved a novel situation, was
constrained by a finite resource, involved real-time coordination, or was sourced from a real-world
context. We labeled RE-bench and HCAST tasks on the presence or absence of these 16 messiness
factors, then summed these to obtain a “messiness score” ranging from 0 to 16. Factor definitions
can be found in Appendix H.6.
The mean messiness score amongst HCAST and RE-Bench tasks is 3.2/16. None of these tasks have
a messiness score above 8/16. For comparison, a task like ’write a good research paper’ would score
between 9/16 and 15/16, depending on the specifics of the task.
On HCAST tasks, AI agents do perform worse on messier tasks than would be predicted from the
task’s length alone (b=-0.081, R2 = 0.251), see Figure 13. An increase in task messiness by 1 point
reduces mean success rates by roughly 8.1%19 .
However, trends in AI agent performance over time are similar for lower and higher messiness
subsets of the task suite. For example, on sub hour tasks, success rates increased by 40 percentage
points between Jan. 2023 and May 2025 in both high and low messiness splits (Figure 12). In
particular, we find no evidence of either much slower performance trends, or a plateau, specific to
our higher messiness subset.

G        Miscellaneous tables and figures
The following are several figures not included in the main body, from external validity and other
sections.

H        More ablations and robustness checks
There are many ways to measure “time to complete” a “well-defined task”, so our analysis involved
many somewhat arbitrary choices. To ensure our results are robust, we’ve reproduced our results
with alterations to our methodology and find the results are largely robust to these changes.
Because we used these analyses to inform our methodology choices, these ablations were performed
relative to a slightly different version of the pipeline than the one in the final report. In particular,
they include a slightly different set of baselines and different filtering for task success.

         1. Alternative curve-fits (H.1)
         2. Re-normalizing the task suite to other distributions than log-uniform
    19
     A linear approximation of this relationship is used for the purpose of roughly quantifying the size of this
effect in an intuitive way.


                                                      31
     Figure 10: Time horizons on HCAST + RE-bench, for models starting with GPT-4 0314.




Figure 11: The full time series for the time horizon of models, by release date. We plot in blue the
regression from only 2023+ data on HCAST + RE-Bench tasks, extended into the past, and in gray
the regression with all tasks (including SWAA) on the whole 6 year period. Points on the graph are
models’ time horizons on all data including SWAA.




                                                32
                   Table 7: Average Success Rate by Model and Task Source

                  Task Source                 HCAST      RE-Bench    SWAA
                  Claude 3 Opus               0.25       0.00        0.98
                  Claude 3.5 Sonnet (New)     0.46       0.11        0.99
                  Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Old)     0.38       0.05        1.00
                  Claude 3.7 Sonnet           0.58       0.04        1.00
                  GPT-2                       -          -           0.40
                  GPT-4 0314                  0.23       0.00        0.98
                  GPT-4 1106                  0.30       0.02        0.97
                  GPT-4 Turbo                 0.23       0.00        1.00
                  GPT-4o                      0.30       0.00        0.98
                  davinci-002 (GPT-3)         0.00       0.00        0.65
                  gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct      0.01       0.00        0.95
                  o1                          0.54       0.07        1.00
                  o1-preview                  0.44       0.02        1.00
                  o3                          0.65       0.40        -
                  o4-mini                     0.61       0.27        -




Figure 12: Performance trends over time for HCAST and RE-Bench tasks by length and messiness
(Section F.2). The data spans only 2023–2025 as pre-2023 models score 0 on non-SWAA tasks.
Whilst our messier tasks have lower average success rates, trends in model performance improve-
ments are not obviously slower on the high messiness split.


                                              33
Figure 13: We plot the excess success rate (the observed empirical task success rate, minus success
rate we would predict using the task’s length, see Section 3.1) against messiness score for each
task. As discussed in Section F.2, there is a negative relationship between excess success rates and
messiness.




Figure 14: Cost of a successful run using an LLM agent as a fraction of the cost of the salary of a
human expert performing the same task.




                                                34
      Figure 15: Linear, hyperbolic, and exponential fits for model time horizon since 2019.

      3. Alternative means of estimating task difficulty
      4. Sensitivity to baseliner ability:
            • Baseliners whose abilities we are subjectively very confident in
            • Restricting the task suite to tasks with at least 2 baselines and using the best baseline
              time on each task as our difficulty estimate
            • Restricting the task suite to tasks with at least 2 baselines and using the worst baseline
              time on each task as our difficulty estimate
            • Adding noise to baseline times (included in Figure 6)
      5. Task choice: Removing RE-Bench tasks
      6. Different weightings of task families: √ 1             vs uniform (included in Figure 6); also
                                                    family size
             1
         family size
      7. Estimated training date vs estimates of release date
      8. Continuous scoring: Figure 16

H.1   Alternative curve fits

In our main result, we fit an exponential curve (linear with a log y axis) because the fit is very
good (R2 ≥ 0.96, depending on the exact data and methodology). Linear and hyperbolic curves
have poor fits (Figure 15). Because there are only 12 frontier models in the time span we studied,
and the exponential fit has such high R2 with only two parameters, we think applying fits with
more parameters would be more likely to overfit than to give accurate predictions. In particular, we
considered:
       • A double exponential function log(horizon) ∼ a + b exp(c · (release date + d)) is strictly
         more expressive than an exponential (because exp(x) ≈ x for small x, they are equivalent
         when c is small)
       • Likewise, the initial part of any saturating logistic function horizon ∼ a · σ(release date +
         d) looks very similar to an exponential, and without any evidence that AI horizon is leveling
         off (on our metric), it is essentially impossible to predict when or if it will plateau, or for
         how long.
       • Sophisticated stochastic models that asymptote to infinity often have large uncertainties;
         see Roodman [52], which applied a superexponential diffusion model to economic data.
         As we discuss in Section 5, large uncertainty may be appropriate when constructing a
         prediction interval for a long-term forecast, but quantitatively modeling the potential impact
         of the factors we mentioned is out of scope of this paper, so we prefer to discuss these
         qualitatively.


                                                  35
Figure 16: Time horizon with continuous (non-binarized) scoring. Claude 3.7 Sonnet has a 50%
time horizon of nearly 2 hours. We think this methodology captures more signal from 8-hour RE-
Bench tasks, but overstates the time horizon of recent models, since it is easier to achieve an average
score of 0.5 on most tasks than to match human performance 50% of the time. The slope is also
likely an overestimate, because longer tasks tend to be continuously scored.




Figure 17: Trend in 80% success rate time horizon. The doubling time is similar to the 50% plot,
but horizons are substantially lower. 50% horizon trend shown in grey.



H.2   Horizons at 80% success rate

In Figure 17, we show the trend for the 80% time horizon for models over time. The doubling time
is similar to the 50% plot, but horizons are substantially lower.


H.3   Success rate versus inference cost

In Figure 18, we plot the success rate of models across our tasks as a function of token costs. All of
the models studied perform better with larger token budgets, but the majority of models show clear
evidence of plateaus far below the maximum number of tokens allocated to each model.


                                                  36
Figure 18: Success rate by cost. Models were given sufficiently high token limits to reach a plateau
in success rate. Cost information is not included for o3 and o4-mini.




           Figure 19: 2024–2025 and 2019–2025 exponential fits for 50% time horizon.


H.4   2024–2025 Horizon growth trend

If the 2024–2025 horizon growth trend continues to exceed the 2019–2023 slope, future work should
apply change point analysis to determine whether the difference in slope is statistically significant.

H.5   SWE-bench Verified

Data Collection We collected per-model, per-task results from the official SWE-bench evaluation
results repository for frontier models: Claude 3 Opus, Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Old), Claude 3.5 Sonnet
(New), GPT-4 1106, GPT-4o, and o1. Note that this is only 6 of the 11 models we include in the
main result.

Time estimates SWE-bench Verified contains time estimates created by contractors that split tasks
into four buckets: < 15 min fix, 15 minutes–1 hour, 1 hour–4 hours, or > 4 hours. These estimates
were based on the expected time it would take an “engineer who has had a few hours to familiarize
themselves with the codebase” to solve the issue.
We verified annotator time buckets by running seven baselines across 6 SWE-bench Verified tasks.
We baselined four tasks in the “< 15 min fix” bucket, and found that they took our baseliners 8, 26,
67, and 84 minutes respectively. We baselined two tasks in the “1 hour–4 hours” bucket, and both
baseliners took between 2–3 hours.


                                                 37
              Task Time Bucket       Task Time Estimate        Average Baseline Time
              < 15 min fix                  3.9 min                  32.9 min
              15 min–1 hour                30.0 min                      –
              1–4 hours                   120.0 min                  131.6 min
              > 4 hours                   480.0 min                      –

Table 8: We convert the SWE-bench Verified time annotations into task estimates, by taking the
geometric mean of the time annotation. We caution that this likely underestimates the time each
issue takes to resolve by a human baseliner without context—notably, we observe that the geometric
mean of baseliner time for four randomly sampled tasks in the “< 15 minute fix” bucket is 32.9
minutes.

                                 Model Time         Model Time
                                                                                   Model
   Model                           Horizon            Horizon
                                                                             Time Horizon Ratio
                                 (Our Tasks)     (SWE-bench Verified)
   Claude 3 Opus                   6.42 min           0.83 min                       7.8x
   GPT-4 1106                      8.56 min           1.18 min                       7.2x
   GPT-4o                          9.17 min           5.96 min                       1.5x
   Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Old)        18.22 min           5.91 min                       3.1x
   Claude 3.5 Sonnet (New)        28.98 min          16.88 min                       1.7x
   o1                             39.21 min          51.21 min                       0.8x

Table 9: The time horizon of less capable models is substantially longer on our tasks than on SWE-
bench Verified.


Analysis methodology We converted annotator time range estimates into per-task time estimates.
We do this by taking the geometric mean of the starting and ending times of the time buckets. We
select 16 hours as the upper limit for SWE-bench Verified tasks, but there are only 3 tasks in this
time bucket, and they do not meaningfully affect the results. We then applied the same methods as
used in Section 3 to convert per-model, per-task results and task time estimates into a model time
horizon. To reduce the influence of similar tasks, we consider tasks that involve issues belonging to
the same repository as part of the same task family, and down-weight the contribution of tasks by
the square-root of the number of tasks in the same family.

Annotator vs contract baseliner times As shown in Table 8, we found that annotator time esti-
mates are likely more inaccurate on the “<15 min fix” time bucket, as in practice baseliners often
take much longer than this to complete tasks. This results in easier tasks’ difficulty being under-
estimated, meaning that the SWE-bench Verified time horizon estimates likely underestimate true
model performance for less capable models, which in turn leads to a steeper exponential trend.

H.6   Messiness factors

Messiness factor labels were collected from 2 internal contractors and one researcher.
The full list of messiness factors and definitions used are shown in Tables 10 and 11.
In Figure 20, we plot the messiness scores of HCAST tasks against log human time-to-complete.
We find that messiness is correlated with task length, and that we have very few short tasks with a
high messiness score. We also color each point by the performance of the model. Tasks with high
messiness and which take humans a long time to complete tend to have low success rates, and vice
versa for shorter, lower messiness tasks.
A limitation of our messiness factors is that they are at least somewhat adversarially selected against
current models. This is due to the combination of selecting for perceiving the factor to be relevant
to model performance, and all of these factors being expected to make tasks more difficult. As a
result, we might expect model performance to be more negatively correlated with our task messiness
measure than it ought to be—and for predictive adjustments based on messiness to work less well
for models released long before, or after, the time of this analysis.


                                                  38
                              Table 10: Messiness Factor Definitions 1-8
Factor              Definition
Real life source    Is this task: EITHER 1. Intended to be representative of some real world end-to-end task (if
                    uncertain, is more likely than not) OR 2. Sourced from a real-life problem
                    AND
                    3. Has NOT been intentionally simplified to an easier and smaller subtask.
Resource            Does this task:
limited             Require the use of a limited and one-time consumable resource where BOTH
                    1. Using the resource wisely is more relevant to task failure / success than using the default
                    resource limits wisely (time, tokens, cost)
                    2. The resource is not easily replenishable within the task (e.g. limited number of queries to a
                    verifier, or a permanent counter on guesses made that counts against the agent’s score)
Not easily reset-   Is it difficult for the agent to reset the (task success relevant) state back to the initial starting
table               state if desired, given no very obvious poor actions were taken? (e.g. rm -rf ing the env is too
                    obviously poor) To be easily resettable, this should be able to be done without prior planning,
                    but can involve back tracking based on the history of actions up to that point.
Irreversible        Do you think it would be somewhat likely (>20%) that a 20th percentile human (from the
mistake             distribution of people with background in the domain of the task but not prior context on this
availability        specific task) would make a mistake during the first 50% of their time spent on the task that
                    would permanently and irreversibly reduce the score they could achieve?
Dynamic             Does the task involve interacting with a changing environment in ways significant to task
environment         success, even if the agent takes no actions? This is true if this is the case for a significant part
                    of the task, even if it isn’t true over the whole duration of the task.
Difficult           Are there significant success-relevant parts of the task where it is difficult for the agent to
counterfactuals     figure out whether a given effect should be attributed to its own actions (or lack of actions), or
                    to something else?
                    An example might be a task where the agent was optimizing a distributed computing system’s
                    performance. In this task the system occasionally experiences cascading slowdown and failures
                    but this isn’t mentioned in the task prompt. If the agent is making some seemingly unrelated
                    optimization it might be difficult to determine if the cause of these failures is downstream of
                    the agent’s direct changes, differences in load over time, random variation e.t.c
                    Another example might be a case where adding debugging behavior like logging would change
                    the behavior of the system being logged, which would make it harder to observe the system
                    and tease apart the causal effects of different interventions.
Not purely auto-    Does this task NOT have an entirely automatic scoring function?
matic scoring       Specifically, for tasks implemented in the task standard:
                    1. There are no branches in which the scoring function returns None AND 2. The task provides
                    manual scoring instructions in those cases AND 3. There are no clauses about obeying rules
                    that are not actually checked in the automatic scoring. (e.g A family which had the instruction
                    ”you may not attempt to reverse engineer X’” but this is not checked in the automatic scoring
                    function)
Implicit            Is it saliently possible to satisfy the stated success conditions in the prompt in such a way that
generalizability    the spirit of task is not actually fulfilled, or the product would not be useful for the implied
required            purpose?
                    For example, a task asking the agent to train a good small model may have various explicitly
                    stated conditions for scoring well, like loss achieved, or accuracy. But meeting the word of
                    these requirements may not actually be enough for a solution to be useful for the implied
                    purpose (in this case, something like ’make a good model). For example, a model that takes
                    a minute to produce a single token doesn’t seem very useful. This could be thought of as an
                    implicit requirement that the solution generalizes to the implied use case.
                    The spirit of this column is basically ’does the agent have to make sensible judgement calls on
                    soft constraints that are not necessarily explicitly stated by the task prompt in order to produce
                    an output that would be useful for the implied purpose of the task’?
                    For toy tasks where there is not a strong reason to think that there is an implied purpose, this
                    is false.
                    AND
                    Are these implicit generalizability requirements checked during scoring, either by the scoring
                    function or by manual judgement / review?
                    (For example, some tasks have an additional manual review stage to check for exploit solutions,
                    this counts. Other tasks use manual scorer judgement to check that the output is useful.)




                                                      39
                              Table 11: Messiness Factor Definitions 9-16
 Factor              Definition
 Non explicit        Both must be true:
 scoring             Firstly: a. The constraints on which the agent is scored are NOT all explicitly stated OR b.
 description         the scoring is described in a way such that there remains significant hidden information in the
                     scoring)
                     AND secondly:
                     This lack of information about scoring produces task-relevant uncertainty about the best course
                     of action within the task. (For example, managing tradeoffs between two different factors being
                     optimize, but whose exact weightings in scoring are uncertain)
                     For example, a task that just says to return the number of days there were in March 2022 would
                     not count as having non explicit scoring. This is because there is no task-relevant uncertainty
                     introduced by this lack of information.
 Is suboptimal       Does this task involve competing against other agents or programs that will actively exploit
 behavior            weakness or suboptimal behavior of the agent (or outputs of the agent)? Tasks which have
 exploited           some adversary type program or behavior are typical examples.
 No      provided    The task does not provide a way for the agent to check its answer or score midrun. Requires
 verification        the agent to do some non-trivial amount of work to check its answer.
 mechanisms
 Real-time           Does this task require real-time coordination with other agents, or services, or require compe-
 coordination        tently orchestrating multiple real-time processes in parallel? For this, monitoring an ongoing
                     training run would NOT count unless it was expected / required by the task that the agent per-
                     form multiple training runs (or similar) in parallel.
 Self                Does this task require the agent to modify a portion of itself, or the code that is being used to
 modification        interact with the environment, or to create a new tool for itself, or to create data that could be
 required            used to do this?
 Self                Does this task require the agent to improve itself in some that permanently increase its per-
 improvement         formance on a wide distribution of tasks? For example, for AI agents, this could be creating
 required            finetuning data that works to improve the agents own general agency performance would sat-
                     isfy this. However, creating finetuning data that improves performance on some narrow task
                     would not satisfy this (and would instead satisfy self modification).
 Information         The task requires gathering information that the agent would not be expected to know ahead
 seeking required    of time. For example, probing the behavior of a novel system.
 Novel situation     The task has some kind of unusual constraint, or unusual property, without which the task
                     would be significantly easier or more rote, and which is a significant source of the tasks diffi-
                     culty.


H.7     Randomizing file names

To better understand the effect of messiness on agent and human performance, we modified an
existing HCAST task, which involved looking through local LaTeX and PDF files to find a specific
piece of information, by randomizing file names, folder names, and providing less information on
what to search for.

H.7.1     Methods
The specific HCAST task modified is called Local Research TeX. The unmodified version of this
task initializes the agent environment to have a collection of nested folders and content, and then
prompts the user to find some specific information, for example, with the prompt “According to the
AR report, how many tasks did the best-performing agent complete?” Agents (or humans) must then
search the local folders and content to find the specific answer to this question (in this case, “four”).
We modified this task in a variety of ways, but the most notable variant involved:

        1. Modifying the prompt from “According to the AR report” to “Find the answer to the fol-
           lowing question in one of the resources in /home/agent/resources/”:
        2. Modifying the all folder names to random integers, and all file names to meaningless names
           like “final” or “my file.”

We then ran agents for about a hundred runs across the original variant of this task and the modified
version of this task, and compared the respective success rates. We also calculated the human time
to complete using our standard baseline methodology.


                                                      40
                             Figure 20: Messier tasks tend to be longer.


H.7.2    Results

Surprisingly, o1’s performance is on average better on the messier variant of the report, and human
baseliners performed much worse. Qualitatively, o1 appears to do much better on the scrambled-

           Task Variant                                    Success Rate      Baseliner Time
           local research tex/ar report                        34%             24 minutes
           local research tex/ar report scrambled files        50%             53 minutes

filename variant of this task because it is not given the term “AR report” in its prompt. In practice, o1
often decides to grep for the term “AR report” and fails to find it (as the actual report is named “ARA
report”), and then makes a guess. On the other hand, when told to look in one of the resources, o1
performs a more general search, and finds the report it’s looking for (more often). While this is only
one limited example, we believe this further illustrates the challenges of quantifying and predicting
how aspects of any task may effect agent performance - indeed, factors that make humans worse at
some tasks may indeed improve agent performance.

H.8     Correlation in performance between agents

In Figure 22, we report the correlation matrix of per-task success rates between each pair of models.

                                                S         −S
Excess success rates Excess success rates ( observed      predicted
                                                   Spredicted       ) are a metric for how much better
(or worse) an AI agent performed compared to what we would expect, given a task’s length and that
model’s ability (expected success can be seen in Figure 4).
In Figure 23, we report the correlation matrix for the excess success rate
(Sobserved − Spredicted )/Spredicted (where Spredicted is the success rate predicted from the
model’s time horizon). While the correlations for excess success rate are lower than the correlation
of raw task success rate (0.38 instead of 0.71), the fact that it is positive suggests additional factors
that explain model success rates across tasks which are common across models.


                                                    41
Figure 21: Model success rates on HCAST + RE-Bench tasks, split by task messiness rating. Models
have higher success rates on the less messy tasks, but the rate of improvement over time is similar
for both subsets. Both davinci-002 and gpt-3.5-turbo instruct score 0 on the subset of HCAST +
RE-Bench with higher messiness.


I   Code
Code and data to reproduce some of the core figures in this paper will be provided in the supplemen-
tary material; the full codebase is infeasible to publicize and anonymize but the authors can provide
code for individual additional figures on reviewer request.

J   Author contributions

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
Thomas Kwa led the development of SWAA tasks, wrote most of the data analysis code, and wrote
the plurality of the final draft including generating about half of the figures. Ben West performed
the initial analysis, and co-led the project. Joel Becker led human baselining processes and data
collection for RE-Bench and HCAST tasks, and contributed to early data analysis code. Amy Deng
created most of the SWAA tasks, collected human baselines and AI agent results on the SWAA tasks.
She also investigated agent and task failures and assisted with obtaining agent results on HCAST
tasks. Katharyn Garcia wrote evaluation and data analysis code. Max Hasin led the qualitative


                                                 42
       Figure 22: Correlation matrix of observed success rates across all models and tasks.




                                                                    Sobserved −Spredicted
Figure 23: Correlation matrix of excess success rates (defined by        Spredicted       ) across all
models and tasks.




                                               43
Figure 24: Change in time horizon of frontier models over time. Note: the data displayed is the
same as in Figure 1, but with a linear axis.




       Figure 25: Time horizon of all models we measured, including non-frontier models.




                                              44
Figure 26: Length in human expert clock-time of tasks that frontier models can perform competently
over time. See Section 3 for details on time horizon length calculation. The line represents the
linear regression fit, with a confidence region calculated via hierarchical bootstrapping. In this
plot, davinci-002 and gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct are placed at the release dates of GPT-3 and GPT-3.5
respectively, and GPT-2’s score is imputed as zero for longer tasks for which our scaffolds are
incompatible. Note: this is the same as Figure 1 but presented differently.


impressions work and wrote key sections, gathered internal PRs, and contributed to data analysis
code and baselining collection. Sami Jawhar contributed to the task-running and data analysis
infrastructure. Megan Kinniment performed the messiness experiments, excess success rate and
initial reliability analyses, oversaw the creation of many HCAST tasks, and contributed to figures
and writing. Nate Rush led the SWE-Bench and Internal PR experiments and drafted those sections
of the paper. Sydney Von Arx oversaw internal validity analysis.
Brian Goodrich contributed to the development of the modular-public agent, and created the flock
and duet agents. Nikola Jurkovic baselined SWAA and RE-Bench tasks and tested RE-Bench tasks.
Seraphina Nix contributed to writing and revising the paper and figures. David Rein managed the
development and collection of HCAST tasks and oversaw the human baselining process for those
tasks. Lucas Jun Koba Sato led the development of the AI agents and collection of agent results
on HCAST tasks. Chris Painter suggested substantial framing and presentation changes. Neev
Parikh contributed to running external validity experiments.
Elizabeth Barnes helped develop the basic concept, suggested experiments/analyses, gave feed-
back, and assisted with writing/early task development/analysis code. Lawrence Chan co-led this
project, including setting the overall direction, helping decide what experiments to run, and con-
tributing much of the writing for our paper.




                                               45
